Mr. Brocklehurst buys all our food and all our clothes.”

“Does he live here?”

“No—two miles off, at a large hall.”

“Is he a good man?”

“He is a clergyman, and is said to do a great deal of good.”

“Did you say that tall lady was called Miss Temple?”

“Yes.”

“And what are the other teachers called?”

“The one with red cheeks is called Miss Smith; she attends to the work, and cuts out—for we make our own clothes, our frocks, and pelisses, and everything; the little one with black hair is Miss Scatcherd; she teaches history and grammar, and hears the second class repetitions; and the one who wears a shawl, and has a pocket-handkerchief tied to her side with a yellow ribband, is Madame Pierrot: she comes from Lisle, in France, and teaches French.”

“Do you like the teachers?”

“Well enough.”

“Do you like the little black one, and the Madame ——?—I cannot pronounce her name as you do.”

“Miss Scatcherd is hasty—you must take care not to offend her; Madame Pierrot is not a bad sort of person.”

“But Miss Temple is the best—isn’t she?”

“Miss Temple is very good and very clever; she is above the rest, because she knows far more than they do.”

“Have you been long here?”

“Two years.”

“Are you an orphan?”

“My mother is dead.”

“Are you happy here?”

“You ask rather too many questions.
“These were vile discoveries; but except for the treachery of concealment, I should have made them no subject of reproach to my wife, even when I found her nature wholly alien to mine, her tastes obnoxious to me, her cast of mind common, low, narrow, and singularly incapable of being led to anything higher, expanded to anything larger—when I found that I could not pass a single evening, nor even a single hour of the day with her in comfort; that kindly conversation could not be sustained between us, because whatever topic I started, immediately received from her a turn at once coarse and trite, perverse and imbecile—when I perceived that I should never have a quiet or settled household, because no servant would bear the continued outbreaks of her violent and unreasonable temper, or the vexations of her absurd, contradictory, exacting orders—even then I restrained myself: I eschewed upbraiding, I curtailed remonstrance; I tried to devour my repentance and disgust in secret; I repressed the deep antipathy I felt.
They were those which treat of the haunts of sea-fowl; of “the solitary rocks and promontories” by them only inhabited; of the coast of Norway, studded with isles from its southern extremity, the Lindeness, or Naze, to the North Cape—

“Where the Northern Ocean, in vast whirls,
Boils round the naked, melancholy isles
Of farthest Thule; and the Atlantic surge
Pours in among the stormy Hebrides.”

Nor could I pass unnoticed the suggestion of the bleak shores of Lapland, Siberia, Spitzbergen, Nova Zembla, Iceland, Greenland, with “the vast sweep of the Arctic Zone, and those forlorn regions of dreary space,—that reservoir of frost and snow, where firm fields of ice, the accumulation of centuries of winters, glazed in Alpine heights above heights, surround the pole, and concentre the multiplied rigours of extreme cold.” Of these death-white realms I formed an idea of my own: shadowy, like all the half-comprehended notions that float dim through children’s brains, but strangely impressive.
You intend to make yourself a complete stranger to me: to live under this roof only as Adèle’s governess; if ever I say a friendly word to you, if ever a friendly feeling inclines you again to me, you will say,—‘That man had nearly made me his mistress: I must be ice and rock to him;’ and ice and rock you will accordingly become.”

I cleared and steadied my voice to reply: “All is changed about me, sir; I must change too—there is no doubt of that; and to avoid fluctuations of feeling, and continual combats with recollections and associations, there is only one way—Adèle must have a new governess, sir.”

“Oh, Adèle will go to school—I have settled that already; nor do I mean to torment you with the hideous associations and recollections of Thornfield Hall—this accursed place—this tent of Achan—this insolent vault, offering the ghastliness of living death to the light of the open sky—this narrow stone hell, with its one real fiend, worse than a legion of such as we imagine.
He went to college, and he got—plucked, I think they call it: and then his uncles wanted him to be a barrister, and study the law: but he is such a dissipated young man, they will never make much of him, I think.”

“What does he look like?”

“He is very tall: some people call him a fine-looking young man; but he has such thick lips.”

“And Mrs. Reed?”

“Missis looks stout and well enough in the face, but I think she’s not quite easy in her mind: Mr. John’s conduct does not please her—he spends a deal of money.”

“Did she send you here, Bessie?”

“No, indeed: but I have long wanted to see you, and when I heard that there had been a letter from you, and that you were going to another part of the country, I thought I’d just set off, and get a look at you before you were quite out of my reach.”

“I am afraid you are disappointed in me, Bessie.” I said this laughing: I perceived that Bessie’s glance, though it expressed regard, did in no shape denote admiration.
It seems strange to me that all round me do not burn to enlist under the same banner,—to join in the same enterprise.”

“All have not your powers, and it would be folly for the feeble to wish to march with the strong.”

“I do not speak to the feeble, or think of them: I address only such as are worthy of the work, and competent to accomplish it.”

“Those are few in number, and difficult to discover.”

“You say truly; but when found, it is right to stir them up—to urge and exhort them to the effort—to show them what their gifts are, and why they were given—to speak Heaven’s message in their ear,—to offer them, direct from God, a place in the ranks of His chosen.”

“If they are really qualified for the task, will not their own hearts be the first to inform them of it?”

I felt as if an awful charm was framing round and gathering over me: I trembled to hear some fatal word spoken which would at once declare and rivet the spell.
Mrs. Fairfax’s room and yours are the nearest to master’s; but Mrs. Fairfax said she heard nothing: when people get elderly, they often sleep heavy.” She paused, and then added, with a sort of assumed indifference, but still in a marked and significant tone—“But you are young, Miss; and I should say a light sleeper: perhaps you may have heard a noise?”

“I did,” said I, dropping my voice, so that Leah, who was still polishing the panes, could not hear me, “and at first I thought it was Pilot: but Pilot cannot laugh; and I am certain I heard a laugh, and a strange one.”

She took a new needleful of thread, waxed it carefully, threaded her needle with a steady hand, and then observed, with perfect composure—

“It is hardly likely master would laugh, I should think, Miss, when he was in such danger: You must have been dreaming.”

“I was not dreaming,” I said, with some warmth, for her brazen coolness provoked me.
It was at all times pleasant to listen while from his lips fell the words of the Bible: never did his fine voice sound at once so sweet and full—never did his manner become so impressive in its noble simplicity, as when he delivered the oracles of God: and to-night that voice took a more solemn tone—that manner a more thrilling meaning—as he sat in the midst of his household circle (the May moon shining in through the uncurtained window, and rendering almost unnecessary the light of the candle on the table): as he sat there, bending over the great old Bible, and described from its page the vision of the new heaven and the new earth—told how God would come to dwell with men, how He would wipe away all tears from their eyes, and promised that there should be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, nor any more pain, because the former things were passed away.
I considered it a narrative of facts, and discovered in it a vein of interest deeper than what I found in fairy tales: for as to the elves, having sought them in vain among foxglove leaves and bells, under mushrooms and beneath the ground-ivy mantling old wall-nooks, I had at length made up my mind to the sad truth, that they were all gone out of England to some savage country where the woods were wilder and thicker, and the population more scant; whereas, Lilliput and Brobdignag being, in my creed, solid parts of the earth’s surface, I doubted not that I might one day, by taking a long voyage, see with my own eyes the little fields, houses, and trees, the diminutive people, the tiny cows, sheep, and birds of the one realm; and the corn-fields forest-high, the mighty mastiffs, the monster cats, the tower-like men and women, of the other.
At this period of my life, my heart far oftener swelled with thankfulness than sank with dejection: and yet, reader, to tell you all, in the midst of this calm, this useful existence—after a day passed in honourable exertion amongst my scholars, an evening spent in drawing or reading contentedly alone—I used to rush into strange dreams at night: dreams many-coloured, agitated, full of the ideal, the stirring, the stormy—dreams where, amidst unusual scenes, charged with adventure, with agitating risk and romantic chance, I still again and again met Mr. Rochester, always at some exciting crisis; and then the sense of being in his arms, hearing his voice, meeting his eye, touching his hand and cheek, loving him, being loved by him—the hope of passing a lifetime at his side, would be renewed, with all its first force and fire.
“Now, my little friend, while the sun drinks the dew—while all the flowers in this old garden awake and expand, and the birds fetch their young ones’ breakfast out of the Thornfield, and the early bees do their first spell of work—I’ll put a case to you, which you must endeavour to suppose your own: but first, look at me, and tell me you are at ease, and not fearing that I err in detaining you, or that you err in staying.”

“No, sir; I am content.”

“Well then, Jane, call to aid your fancy:—suppose you were no longer a girl well reared and disciplined, but a wild boy indulged from childhood upwards; imagine yourself in a remote foreign land; conceive that you there commit a capital error, no matter of what nature or from what motives, but one whose consequences must follow you through life and taint all your existence.
When tea was over and Mrs. Fairfax had taken her knitting, and I had assumed a low seat near her, and Adèle, kneeling on the carpet, had nestled close up to me, and a sense of mutual affection seemed to surround us with a ring of golden peace, I uttered a silent prayer that we might not be parted far or soon; but when, as we thus sat, Mr. Rochester entered, unannounced, and looking at us, seemed to take pleasure in the spectacle of a group so amicable—when he said he supposed the old lady was all right now that she had got her adopted daughter back again, and added that he saw Adèle was “prête à croquer sa petite maman Anglaise”—I half ventured to hope that he would, even after his marriage, keep us together somewhere under the shelter of his protection, and not quite exiled from the sunshine of his presence.
“This I learned from her benefactress; from the pious and charitable lady who adopted her in her orphan state, reared her as her own daughter, and whose kindness, whose generosity the unhappy girl repaid by an ingratitude so bad, so dreadful, that at last her excellent patroness was obliged to separate her from her own young ones, fearful lest her vicious example should contaminate their purity: she has sent her here to be healed, even as the Jews of old sent their diseased to the troubled pool of Bethesda; and, teachers, superintendent, I beg of you not to allow the waters to stagnate round her.”

With this sublime conclusion, Mr. Brocklehurst adjusted the top button of his surtout, muttered something to his family, who rose, bowed to Miss Temple, and then all the great people sailed in state from the room.
Anybody may blame me who likes, when I add further, that, now and then, when I took a walk by myself in the grounds; when I went down to the gates and looked through them along the road; or when, while Adèle played with her nurse, and Mrs. Fairfax made jellies in the storeroom, I climbed the three staircases, raised the trap-door of the attic, and having reached the leads, looked out afar over sequestered field and hill, and along dim sky-line—that then I longed for a power of vision which might overpass that limit; which might reach the busy world, towns, regions full of life I had heard of but never seen—that then I desired more of practical experience than I possessed; more of intercourse with my kind, of acquaintance with variety of character, than was here within my reach.
A brief address on those occasions would not be mistimed, wherein a judicious instructor would take the opportunity of referring to the sufferings of the primitive Christians; to the torments of martyrs; to the exhortations of our blessed Lord Himself, calling upon His disciples to take up their cross and follow Him; to His warnings that man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God; to His divine consolations, ‘If ye suffer hunger or thirst for My sake, happy are ye.’ Oh, madam, when you put bread and cheese, instead of burnt porridge, into these children’s mouths, you may indeed feed their vile bodies, but you little think how you starve their immortal souls!”

Mr. Brocklehurst again paused—perhaps overcome by his feelings.
I heard him in a blubbering tone commence the tale of how “that nasty Jane Eyre” had flown at him like a mad cat: he was stopped rather harshly—

“Don’t talk to me about her, John: I told you not to go near her; she is not worthy of notice; I do not choose that either you or your sisters should associate with her.”

Here, leaning over the banister, I cried out suddenly, and without at all deliberating on my words—

“They are not fit to associate with me.”

Mrs. Reed was rather a stout woman; but, on hearing this strange and audacious declaration, she ran nimbly up the stair, swept me like a whirlwind into the nursery, and crushing me down on the edge of my crib, dared me in an emphatic voice to rise from that place, or utter one syllable during the remainder of the day.
Death was not for such as I.”

“Indeed it was: I had as good a right to die when my time came as he had: but I should bide that time, and not be hurried away in a suttee.”

“Would I forgive him for the selfish idea, and prove my pardon by a reconciling kiss?”

“No: I would rather be excused.”

Here I heard myself apostrophised as a “hard little thing;” and it was added, “any other woman would have been melted to marrow at hearing such stanzas crooned in her praise.”

I assured him I was naturally hard—very flinty, and that he would often find me so; and that, moreover, I was determined to show him divers rugged points in my character before the ensuing four weeks elapsed: he should know fully what sort of a bargain he had made, while there was yet time to rescind it.
Mrs. Reed might be at that time some six or seven and thirty; she was a woman of robust frame, square-shouldered and strong-limbed, not tall, and, though stout, not obese: she had a somewhat large face, the under jaw being much developed and very solid; her brow was low, her chin large and prominent, mouth and nose sufficiently regular; under her light eyebrows glimmered an eye devoid of ruth; her skin was dark and opaque, her hair nearly flaxen; her constitution was sound as a bell—illness never came near her; she was an exact, clever manager; her household and tenantry were thoroughly under her control; her children only at times defied her authority and laughed it to scorn; she dressed well, and had a presence and port calculated to set off handsome attire.
It is far better to endure patiently a smart which nobody feels but yourself, than to commit a hasty action whose evil consequences will extend to all connected with you; and besides, the Bible bids us return good for evil.”

“But then it seems disgraceful to be flogged, and to be sent to stand in the middle of a room full of people; and you are such a great girl: I am far younger than you, and I could not bear it.”

“Yet it would be your duty to bear it, if you could not avoid it: it is weak and silly to say you cannot bear what it is your fate to be required to bear.”

I heard her with wonder: I could not comprehend this doctrine of endurance; and still less could I understand or sympathise with the forbearance she expressed for her chastiser.
“My name is Briggs, a solicitor of —— Street, London.”

“And you would thrust on me a wife?”

“I would remind you of your lady’s existence, sir, which the law recognises, if you do not.”

“Favour me with an account of her—with her name, her parentage, her place of abode.”

“Certainly.” Mr. Briggs calmly took a paper from his pocket, and read out in a sort of official, nasal voice:—

“‘I affirm and can prove that on the 20th of October A.D. —— (a date of fifteen years back), Edward Fairfax Rochester, of Thornfield Hall, in the county of ——, and of Ferndean Manor, in ——shire, England, was married to my sister, Bertha Antoinetta Mason, daughter of Jonas Mason, merchant, and of Antoinetta his wife, a Creole, at —— church, Spanish Town, Jamaica.
Are they working people?”

“I cannot tell; Aunt Reed says if I have any, they must be a beggarly set: I should not like to go a begging.”

“Would you like to go to school?”

Again I reflected: I scarcely knew what school was: Bessie sometimes spoke of it as a place where young ladies sat in the stocks, wore backboards, and were expected to be exceedingly genteel and precise: John Reed hated his school, and abused his master; but John Reed’s tastes were no rule for mine, and if Bessie’s accounts of school-discipline (gathered from the young ladies of a family where she had lived before coming to Gateshead) were somewhat appalling, her details of certain accomplishments attained by these same young ladies were, I thought, equally attractive.
so it is: but I swear by my household gods not to abuse it.”

“You are human and fallible.”

“I am: so are you—what then?”

“The human and fallible should not arrogate a power with which the divine and perfect alone can be safely intrusted.”

“What power?”

“That of saying of any strange, unsanctioned line of action,—‘Let it be right.’”

“‘Let it be right’—the very words: you have pronounced them.”

“May it be right then,” I said, as I rose, deeming it useless to continue a discourse which was all darkness to me; and, besides, sensible that the character of my interlocutor was beyond my penetration; at least, beyond its present reach; and feeling the uncertainty, the vague sense of insecurity, which accompanies a conviction of ignorance.
The balcony was furnished with a chair or two; I sat down, and took out a cigar,—I will take one now, if you will excuse me.”

Here ensued a pause, filled up by the producing and lighting of a cigar; having placed it to his lips and breathed a trail of Havannah incense on the freezing and sunless air, he went on—

“I liked bonbons too in those days, Miss Eyre, and I was croquant—(overlook the barbarism)—croquant chocolate comfits, and smoking alternately, watching meantime the equipages that rolled along the fashionable streets towards the neighbouring opera-house, when in an elegant close carriage drawn by a beautiful pair of English horses, and distinctly seen in the brilliant city-night, I recognised the ‘voiture’ I had given Céline.
You will see what impetus would be given to your efforts and mine by our physical and mental union in marriage: the only union that gives a character of permanent conformity to the destinies and designs of human beings; and, passing over all minor caprices—all trivial difficulties and delicacies of feeling—all scruple about the degree, kind, strength or tenderness of mere personal inclination—you will hasten to enter into that union at once.”

“Shall I?” I said briefly; and I looked at his features, beautiful in their harmony, but strangely formidable in their still severity; at his brow, commanding but not open; at his eyes, bright and deep and searching, but never soft; at his tall imposing figure; and fancied myself in idea his wife.
I lingered at the gates; I lingered on the lawn; I paced backwards and forwards on the pavement; the shutters of the glass door were closed; I could not see into the interior; and both my eyes and spirit seemed drawn from the gloomy house—from the grey hollow filled with rayless cells, as it appeared to me—to that sky expanded before me,—a blue sea absolved from taint of cloud; the moon ascending it in solemn march; her orb seeming to look up as she left the hill-tops, from behind which she had come, far and farther below her, and aspired to the zenith, midnight dark in its fathomless depth and measureless distance; and for those trembling stars that followed her course; they made my heart tremble, my veins glow when I viewed them.
Adèle was not easy to teach that day; she could not apply: she kept running to the door and looking over the banisters to see if she could get a glimpse of Mr. Rochester; then she coined pretexts to go downstairs, in order, as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library, where I knew she was not wanted; then, when I got a little angry, and made her sit still, she continued to talk incessantly of her “ami, Monsieur Edouard Fairfax de Rochester,” as she dubbed him (I had not before heard his prenomens), and to conjecture what presents he had brought her: for it appears he had intimated the night before, that when his luggage came from Millcote, there would be found amongst it a little box in whose contents she had an interest.
“Is it like?”

“Yes,” she answered; “but he looked better when he was animated; that is his everyday countenance: he wanted spirit in general.”

Catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the Lintons since her five-weeks’ residence among them; and as she had no temptation to show her rough side in their company, and had the sense to be ashamed of being rude where she experienced such invariable courtesy, she imposed unwittingly on the old lady and gentleman by her ingenious cordiality; gained the admiration of Isabella, and the heart and soul of her brother: acquisitions that flattered her from the first—for she was full of ambition—and led her to adopt a double character without exactly intending to deceive any one.
Do they keep us for nothing?”

“We pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for each.”

“Then why do they call us charity-children?”

“Because fifteen pounds is not enough for board and teaching, and the deficiency is supplied by subscription.”

“Who subscribes?”

“Different benevolent-minded ladies and gentlemen in this neighbourhood and in London.”

“Who was Naomi Brocklehurst?”

“The lady who built the new part of this house as that tablet records, and whose son overlooks and directs everything here.”

“Why?”

“Because he is treasurer and manager of the establishment.”

“Then this house does not belong to that tall lady who wears a watch, and who said we were to have some bread and cheese?”

“To Miss Temple?
Teachers, you must watch her: keep your eyes on her movements, weigh well her words, scrutinise her actions, punish her body to save her soul: if, indeed, such salvation be possible, for (my tongue falters while I tell it) this girl, this child, the native of a Christian land, worse than many a little heathen who says its prayers to Brahma and kneels before Juggernaut—this girl is—a liar!”

Now came a pause of ten minutes, during which I, by this time in perfect possession of my wits, observed all the female Brocklehursts produce their pocket-handkerchiefs and apply them to their optics, while the elderly lady swayed herself to and fro, and the two younger ones whispered, “How shocking!”

Mr. Brocklehurst resumed.
When she first came here she could speak no English; now she can make shift to talk it a little: I don’t understand her, she mixes it so with French; but you will make out her meaning very well, I dare say.”

Fortunately I had had the advantage of being taught French by a French lady; and as I had always made a point of conversing with Madame Pierrot as often as I could, and had besides, during the last seven years, learnt a portion of French by heart daily—applying myself to take pains with my accent, and imitating as closely as possible the pronunciation of my teacher, I had acquired a certain degree of readiness and correctness in the language, and was not likely to be much at a loss with Mademoiselle Adela.
“Listen, then, Jane Eyre, to your sentence: to-morrow, place the glass before you, and draw in chalk your own picture, faithfully, without softening one defect; omit no harsh line, smooth away no displeasing irregularity; write under it, ‘Portrait of a Governess, disconnected, poor, and plain.’

“Afterwards, take a piece of smooth ivory—you have one prepared in your drawing-box: take your palette, mix your freshest, finest, clearest tints; choose your most delicate camel-hair pencils; delineate carefully the loveliest face you can imagine; paint it in your softest shades and sweetest lines, according to the description given by Mrs. Fairfax of Blanche Ingram; remember the raven ringlets, the oriental eye;—What!
Mr. Linton had no time to empower me to do so, for Joseph mounted close at my heels, and, pushing into the apartment, planted himself at the far side of the table, with his two fists clapped on the head of his stick, and began in an elevated tone, as if anticipating opposition—

“Hathecliff has sent me for his lad, and I munn’t goa back ’bout him.”

Edgar Linton was silent a minute; an expression of exceeding sorrow overcast his features: he would have pitied the child on his own account; but, recalling Isabella’s hopes and fears, and anxious wishes for her son, and her commendations of him to his care, he grieved bitterly at the prospect of yielding him up, and searched in his heart how it might be avoided.
“Well, sir, I shall be ready when the order to march comes.”

“It is come now—I must give it to-night.”

“Then you are going to be married, sir?”

“Ex-act-ly—pre-cise-ly: with your usual acuteness, you have hit the nail straight on the head.”

“Soon, sir?”

“Very soon, my—that is, Miss Eyre: and you’ll remember, Jane, the first time I, or Rumour, plainly intimated to you that it was my intention to put my old bachelor’s neck into the sacred noose, to enter into the holy estate of matrimony—to take Miss Ingram to my bosom, in short (she’s an extensive armful: but that’s not to the point—one can’t have too much of such a very excellent thing as my beautiful Blanche): well, as I was saying—listen to me, Jane!
Day and night he was watching, and patiently enduring all the annoyances that irritable nerves and a shaken reason could inflict; and, though Kenneth remarked that what he saved from the grave would only recompense his care by forming the source of constant future anxiety—in fact, that his health and strength were being sacrificed to preserve a mere ruin of humanity—he knew no limits in gratitude and joy when Catherine’s life was declared out of danger; and hour after hour he would sit beside her, tracing the gradual return to bodily health, and flattering his too sanguine hopes with the illusion that her mind would settle back to its right balance also, and she would soon be entirely her former self.
“Jane,” he recommenced, as we entered the laurel walk, and slowly strayed down in the direction of the sunk fence and the horse-chestnut, “Thornfield is a pleasant place in summer, is it not?”

“Yes, sir.”

“You must have become in some degree attached to the house,—you, who have an eye for natural beauties, and a good deal of the organ of Adhesiveness?”

“I am attached to it, indeed.”

“And though I don’t comprehend how it is, I perceive you have acquired a degree of regard for that foolish little child Adèle, too; and even for simple dame Fairfax?”

“Yes, sir; in different ways, I have an affection for both.”

“And would be sorry to part with them?”

“Yes.”

“Pity!” he said, and sighed and paused.
Long did the hours seem while I waited the departure of the company, and listened for the sound of Bessie’s step on the stairs: sometimes she would come up in the interval to seek her thimble or her scissors, or perhaps to bring me something by way of supper—a bun or a cheese-cake—then she would sit on the bed while I ate it, and when I had finished, she would tuck the clothes round me, and twice she kissed me, and said, “Good night, Miss Jane.” When thus gentle, Bessie seemed to me the best, prettiest, kindest being in the world; and I wished most intensely that she would always be so pleasant and amiable, and never push me about, or scold, or task me unreasonably, as she was too often wont to do.
Gentlemen especially are often in request on such occasions; and Mr. Rochester is so talented and so lively in society, that I believe he is a general favourite: the ladies are very fond of him; though you would not think his appearance calculated to recommend him particularly in their eyes: but I suppose his acquirements and abilities, perhaps his wealth and good blood, make amends for any little fault of look.”

“Are there ladies at the Leas?”

“There are Mrs. Eshton and her three daughters—very elegant young ladies indeed; and there are the Honourable Blanche and Mary Ingram, most beautiful women, I suppose: indeed I have seen Blanche, six or seven years since, when she was a girl of eighteen.
)—to clean down Moor House from chamber to cellar; my next to rub it up with bees-wax, oil, and an indefinite number of cloths, till it glitters again; my third, to arrange every chair, table, bed, carpet, with mathematical precision; afterwards I shall go near to ruin you in coals and peat to keep up good fires in every room; and lastly, the two days preceding that on which your sisters are expected will be devoted by Hannah and me to such a beating of eggs, sorting of currants, grating of spices, compounding of Christmas cakes, chopping up of materials for mince-pies, and solemnising of other culinary rites, as words can convey but an inadequate notion of to the uninitiated like you.
No charm was wanting, no defect was perceptible; the young girl had regular and delicate lineaments; eyes shaped and coloured as we see them in lovely pictures, large, and dark, and full; the long and shadowy eyelash which encircles a fine eye with so soft a fascination; the pencilled brow which gives such clearness; the white smooth forehead, which adds such repose to the livelier beauties of tint and ray; the cheek oval, fresh, and smooth; the lips, fresh too, ruddy, healthy, sweetly formed; the even and gleaming teeth without flaw; the small dimpled chin; the ornament of rich, plenteous tresses—all advantages, in short, which, combined, realise the ideal of beauty, were fully hers.
“How long did you reside with him and his sisters after the cousinship was discovered?”

“Five months.”

“Did Rivers spend much time with the ladies of his family?”

“Yes; the back parlour was both his study and ours: he sat near the window, and we by the table.”

“Did he study much?”

“A good deal.”

“What?”

“Hindostanee.”

“And what did you do meantime?”

“I learnt German, at first.”

“Did he teach you?”

“He did not understand German.”

“Did he teach you nothing?”

“A little Hindostanee.”

“Rivers taught you Hindostanee?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And his sisters also?”

“No.”

“Only you?”

“Only me.”

“Did you ask to learn?”

“No.”

“He wished to teach you?”

“Yes.”

A second pause.
The wickedness has not been taken out of you, wherever you have sojourned.”

“Yet I have been with good people; far better than you: a hundred times better people; possessed of ideas and views you never entertained in your life: quite more refined and exalted.”

“Who the deuce have you been with?”

“If you twist in that way you will make me pull the hair out of your head; and then I think you will cease to entertain doubts of my substantiality.”

“Who have you been with, Jane?”

“You shall not get it out of me to-night, sir; you must wait till to-morrow; to leave my tale half told, will, you know, be a sort of security that I shall appear at your breakfast table to finish it.
And the clergyman, who had not lifted his eyes from his book, and had held his breath but for a moment, was proceeding: his hand was already stretched towards Mr. Rochester, as his lips unclosed to ask, “Wilt thou have this woman for thy wedded wife?”—when a distinct and near voice said—

“The marriage cannot go on: I declare the existence of an impediment.”

The clergyman looked up at the speaker and stood mute; the clerk did the same; Mr. Rochester moved slightly, as if an earthquake had rolled under his feet: taking a firmer footing, and not turning his head or eyes, he said, “Proceed.”

Profound silence fell when he had uttered that word, with deep but low intonation.
“I think, scathed as you look, and charred and scorched, there must be a little sense of life in you yet, rising out of that adhesion at the faithful, honest roots: you will never have green leaves more—never more see birds making nests and singing idyls in your boughs; the time of pleasure and love is over with you: but you are not desolate: each of you has a comrade to sympathise with him in his decay.” As I looked up at them, the moon appeared momentarily in that part of the sky which filled their fissure; her disk was blood-red and half overcast; she seemed to throw on me one bewildered, dreary glance, and buried herself again instantly in the deep drift of cloud.
“Jane, what are you doing?”

“Learning German.”

“I want you to give up German and learn Hindostanee.”

“You are not in earnest?”

“In such earnest that I must have it so: and I will tell you why.”

He then went on to explain that Hindostanee was the language he was himself at present studying; that, as he advanced, he was apt to forget the commencement; that it would assist him greatly to have a pupil with whom he might again and again go over the elements, and so fix them thoroughly in his mind; that his choice had hovered for some time between me and his sisters; but that he had fixed on me because he saw I could sit at a task the longest of the three.
Besides this earth, and besides the race of men, there is an invisible world and a kingdom of spirits: that world is round us, for it is everywhere; and those spirits watch us, for they are commissioned to guard us; and if we were dying in pain and shame, if scorn smote us on all sides, and hatred crushed us, angels see our tortures, recognise our innocence (if innocent we be: as I know you are of this charge which Mr. Brocklehurst has weakly and pompously repeated at second-hand from Mrs. Reed; for I read a sincere nature in your ardent eyes and on your clear front), and God waits only the separation of spirit from flesh to crown us with a full reward.
Would you go with them?”

“I rather think not, sir: I should have more pleasure in staying with you.”

“To comfort me?”

“Yes, sir, to comfort you, as well as I could.”

“And if they laid you under a ban for adhering to me?”

“I, probably, should know nothing about their ban; and if I did, I should care nothing about it.”

“Then, you could dare censure for my sake?”

“I could dare it for the sake of any friend who deserved my adherence; as you, I am sure, do.”

“Go back now into the room; step quietly up to Mason, and whisper in his ear that Mr. Rochester is come and wishes to see him: show him in here and then leave me.”

“Yes, sir.”

I did his behest.
On that same occasion I learned, for the first time, from Miss Abbot’s communications to Bessie, that my father had been a poor clergyman; that my mother had married him against the wishes of her friends, who considered the match beneath her; that my grandfather Reed was so irritated at her disobedience, he cut her off without a shilling; that after my mother and father had been married a year, the latter caught the typhus fever while visiting among the poor of a large manufacturing town where his curacy was situated, and where that disease was then prevalent: that my mother took the infection from him, and both died within a month of each other.
Know, that in the course of your future life you will often find yourself elected the involuntary confidant of your acquaintances’ secrets: people will instinctively find out, as I have done, that it is not your forte to tell of yourself, but to listen while others talk of themselves; they will feel, too, that you listen with no malevolent scorn of their indiscretion, but with a kind of innate sympathy; not the less comforting and encouraging because it is very unobtrusive in its manifestations.”

“How do you know?—how can you guess all this, sir?”

“I know it well; therefore I proceed almost as freely as if I were writing my thoughts in a diary.
“Nay,” he answered; “but he’s not angry: he seemed rarely pleased indeed; only I made him impatient by speaking to him twice; and then he bid me be off to you: he wondered how I could want the company of anybody else.”

I set his plate to keep warm on the fender; and after an hour or two he re-entered, when the room was clear, in no degree calmer: the same unnatural—it was unnatural—appearance of joy under his black brows; the same bloodless hue, and his teeth visible, now and then, in a kind of smile; his frame shivering, not as one shivers with chill or weakness, but as a tight-stretched cord vibrates—a strong thrilling, rather than trembling.
I think I shall like you again, and yet again: and I will make you confess I do not only like, but love you—with truth, fervour, constancy.”

“Yet are you not capricious, sir?”

“To women who please me only by their faces, I am the very devil when I find out they have neither souls nor hearts—when they open to me a perspective of flatness, triviality, and perhaps imbecility, coarseness, and ill-temper: but to the clear eye and eloquent tongue, to the soul made of fire, and the character that bends but does not break—at once supple and stable, tractable and consistent—I am ever tender and true.”

“Had you ever experience of such a character, sir?
CHAPTER XII
While Miss Linton moped about the park and garden, always silent, and almost always in tears; and her brother shut himself up among books that he never opened—wearying, I guessed, with a continual vague expectation that Catherine, repenting her conduct, would come of her own accord to ask pardon, and seek a reconciliation—and she fasted pertinaciously, under the idea, probably, that at every meal Edgar was ready to choke for her absence, and pride alone held him from running to cast himself at her feet; I went about my household duties, convinced that the Grange had but one sensible soul in its walls, and that lodged in my body.
On arriving there, however, a little herd-boy, despatched as a messenger, told us that,—“Maister Linton wer just o’ this side th’ Heights: and he’d be mitch obleeged to us to gang on a bit further.”

“Then Master Linton has forgot the first injunction of his uncle,” I observed: “he bid us keep on the Grange land, and here we are off at once.”

“Well, we’ll turn our horses’ heads round when we reach him,” answered my companion; “our excursion shall lie towards home.”

But when we reached him, and that was scarcely a quarter of a mile from his own door, we found he had no horse; and we were forced to dismount, and leave ours to graze.
I am not talking to you now through the medium of custom, conventionalities, nor even of mortal flesh;—it is my spirit that addresses your spirit; just as if both had passed through the grave, and we stood at God’s feet, equal,—as we are!”

“As we are!” repeated Mr. Rochester—“so,” he added, enclosing me in his arms, gathering me to his breast, pressing his lips on my lips: “so, Jane!”

“Yes, so, sir,” I rejoined: “and yet not so; for you are a married man—or as good as a married man, and wed to one inferior to you—to one with whom you have no sympathy—whom I do not believe you truly love; for I have seen and heard you sneer at her.
John no one thwarted, much less punished; though he twisted the necks of the pigeons, killed the little pea-chicks, set the dogs at the sheep, stripped the hothouse vines of their fruit, and broke the buds off the choicest plants in the conservatory: he called his mother “old girl,” too; sometimes reviled her for her dark skin, similar to his own; bluntly disregarded her wishes; not unfrequently tore and spoiled her silk attire; and he was still “her own darling.” I dared commit no fault: I strove to fulfil every duty; and I was termed naughty and tiresome, sullen and sneaking, from morning to noon, and from noon to night.
I don’t understand.”

“It is not violence that best overcomes hate—nor vengeance that most certainly heals injury.”

“What then?”

“Read the New Testament, and observe what Christ says, and how He acts; make His word your rule, and His conduct your example.”

“What does He say?”

“Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you and despitefully use you.”

“Then I should love Mrs. Reed, which I cannot do; I should bless her son John, which is impossible.”

In her turn, Helen Burns asked me to explain, and I proceeded forthwith to pour out, in my own way, the tale of my sufferings and resentments.
Were you to argue, object, and annoy me for a year, I could not forego the delicious pleasure of which I have caught a glimpse—that of repaying, in part, a mighty obligation, and winning to myself lifelong friends.”

“You think so now,” rejoined St. John, “because you do not know what it is to possess, nor consequently to enjoy wealth: you cannot form a notion of the importance twenty thousand pounds would give you; of the place it would enable you to take in society; of the prospects it would open to you: you cannot—”

“And you,” I interrupted, “cannot at all imagine the craving I have for fraternal and sisterly love.
In the interview which followed between him and Mrs. Reed, I presume, from after-occurrences, that the apothecary ventured to recommend my being sent to school; and the recommendation was no doubt readily enough adopted; for as Abbot said, in discussing the subject with Bessie when both sat sewing in the nursery one night, after I was in bed, and, as they thought, asleep, “Missis was, she dared say, glad enough to get rid of such a tiresome, ill-conditioned child, who always looked as if she were watching everybody, and scheming plots underhand.” Abbot, I think, gave me credit for being a sort of infantine Guy Fawkes.
Each picture told a story; mysterious often to my undeveloped understanding and imperfect feelings, yet ever profoundly interesting: as interesting as the tales Bessie sometimes narrated on winter evenings, when she chanced to be in good humour; and when, having brought her ironing-table to the nursery hearth, she allowed us to sit about it, and while she got up Mrs. Reed’s lace frills, and crimped her nightcap borders, fed our eager attention with passages of love and adventure taken from old fairy tales and other ballads; or (as at a later period I discovered) from the pages of Pamela, and Henry, Earl of Moreland.
I doubted not—never doubted—that if Mr. Reed had been alive he would have treated me kindly; and now, as I sat looking at the white bed and overshadowed walls—occasionally also turning a fascinated eye towards the dimly gleaming mirror—I began to recall what I had heard of dead men, troubled in their graves by the violation of their last wishes, revisiting the earth to punish the perjured and avenge the oppressed; and I thought Mr. Reed’s spirit, harassed by the wrongs of his sister’s child, might quit its abode—whether in the church vault or in the unknown world of the departed—and rise before me in this chamber.
When I came to the stile, I stopped a minute, looked round and listened, with an idea that a horse’s hoofs might ring on the causeway again, and that a rider in a cloak, and a Gytrash-like Newfoundland dog, might be again apparent: I saw only the hedge and a pollard willow before me, rising up still and straight to meet the moonbeams; I heard only the faintest waft of wind roaming fitful among the trees round Thornfield, a mile distant; and when I glanced down in the direction of the murmur, my eye, traversing the hall-front, caught a light kindling in a window: it reminded me that I was late, and I hurried on.
But I’ll shut up Thornfield Hall: I’ll nail up the front door and board the lower windows: I’ll give Mrs. Poole two hundred a year to live here with my wife, as you term that fearful hag: Grace will do much for money, and she shall have her son, the keeper at Grimsby Retreat, to bear her company and be at hand to give her aid in the paroxysms, when my wife is prompted by her familiar to burn people in their beds at night, to stab them, to bite their flesh from their bones, and so on—”

“Sir,” I interrupted him, “you are inexorable for that unfortunate lady: you speak of her with hate—with vindictive antipathy.
Even in that obscure position, Miss Scatcherd continued to make her an object of constant notice: she was continually addressing to her such phrases as the following:—

“Burns” (such it seems was her name: the girls here were all called by their surnames, as boys are elsewhere), “Burns, you are standing on the side of your shoe; turn your toes out immediately.” “Burns, you poke your chin most unpleasantly; draw it in.” “Burns, I insist on your holding your head up; I will not have you before me in that attitude,” &c. &c.

A chapter having been read through twice, the books were closed and the girls examined.
“Together, they would brave Satan and all his legions.”

As they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to take a last look at the moon—or, more correctly, at each other by her light—I felt irresistibly impelled to escape them again; and, pressing a remembrance into the hand of Mrs. Dean, and disregarding her expostulations at my rudeness, I vanished through the kitchen as they opened the house-door; and so should have confirmed Joseph in his opinion of his fellow-servant’s gay indiscretions, had he not fortunately recognised me for a respectable character by the sweet ring of a sovereign at his feet.
Then my sole relief was to walk along the corridor of the third storey, backwards and forwards, safe in the silence and solitude of the spot, and allow my mind’s eye to dwell on whatever bright visions rose before it—and, certainly, they were many and glowing; to let my heart be heaved by the exultant movement, which, while it swelled it in trouble, expanded it with life; and, best of all, to open my inward ear to a tale that was never ended—a tale my imagination created, and narrated continuously; quickened with all of incident, life, fire, feeling, that I desired and had not in my actual existence.
You were born, I think, to be my torment: my last hour is racked by the recollection of a deed which, but for you, I should never have been tempted to commit.”

“If you could but be persuaded to think no more of it, aunt, and to regard me with kindness and forgiveness——”

“You have a very bad disposition,” said she, “and one to this day I feel it impossible to understand: how for nine years you could be patient and quiescent under any treatment, and in the tenth break out all fire and violence, I can never comprehend.”

“My disposition is not so bad as you think: I am passionate, but not vindictive.
I wonder what she has gone through?”

“Strange hardships, I imagine—poor, emaciated, pallid wanderer!”

“She is not an uneducated person, I should think, by her manner of speaking; her accent was quite pure; and the clothes she took off, though splashed and wet, were little worn and fine.”

“She has a peculiar face; fleshless and haggard as it is, I rather like it; and when in good health and animated, I can fancy her physiognomy would be agreeable.”

Never once in their dialogues did I hear a syllable of regret at the hospitality they had extended to me, or of suspicion of, or aversion to, myself.
and one should consider all, before pronouncing an opinion as to its nature.”

“Miss Eyre, you are not so unsophisticated as Adèle: she demands a ‘cadeau,’ clamorously, the moment she sees me: you beat about the bush.”

“Because I have less confidence in my deserts than Adèle has: she can prefer the claim of old acquaintance, and the right too of custom; for she says you have always been in the habit of giving her playthings; but if I had to make out a case I should be puzzled, since I am a stranger, and have done nothing to entitle me to an acknowledgment.”

“Oh, don’t fall back on over-modesty!
I wish I could believe them to be only such: I wish it more now than ever; since even you cannot explain to me the mystery of that awful visitant.”

“And since I cannot do it, Jane, it must have been unreal.”

“But, sir, when I said so to myself on rising this morning, and when I looked round the room to gather courage and comfort from the cheerful aspect of each familiar object in full daylight, there—on the carpet—I saw what gave the distinct lie to my hypothesis,—the veil, torn from top to bottom in two halves!”

I felt Mr. Rochester start and shudder; he hastily flung his arms round me.
I had remarked on one side of the road, at intervals of six or seven yards, a line of upright stones, continued through the whole length of the barren: these were erected and daubed with lime on purpose to serve as guides in the dark, and also when a fall, like the present, confounded the deep swamps on either hand with the firmer path: but, excepting a dirty dot pointing up here and there, all traces of their existence had vanished: and my companion found it necessary to warn me frequently to steer to the right or left, when I imagined I was following, correctly, the windings of the road.
Arraigned at my own bar, Memory having given her evidence of the hopes, wishes, sentiments I had been cherishing since last night—of the general state of mind in which I had indulged for nearly a fortnight past; Reason having come forward and told, in her own quiet way, a plain, unvarnished tale, showing how I had rejected the real, and rabidly devoured the ideal;—I pronounced judgment to this effect:—

That a greater fool than Jane Eyre had never breathed the breath of life; that a more fantastic idiot had never surfeited herself on sweet lies, and swallowed poison as if it were nectar.
Having spread the quilt and folded my night-dress, I went to the window-seat to put in order some picture-books and doll’s house furniture scattered there; an abrupt command from Georgiana to let her playthings alone (for the tiny chairs and mirrors, the fairy plates and cups, were her property) stopped my proceedings; and then, for lack of other occupation, I fell to breathing on the frost-flowers with which the window was fretted, and thus clearing a space in the glass through which I might look out on the grounds, where all was still and petrified under the influence of a hard frost.
Linton complied; and had he been unrestrained, would probably have spoiled all by filling his epistles with complaints and lamentations: but his father kept a sharp watch over him; and, of course, insisted on every line that my master sent being shown; so, instead of penning his peculiar personal sufferings and distresses, the themes constantly uppermost in his thoughts, he harped on the cruel obligation of being held asunder from his friend and love; and gently intimated that Mr. Linton must allow an interview soon, or he should fear he was purposely deceiving him with empty promises.
We are, and must be, one and all, burdened with faults in this world: but the time will soon come when, I trust, we shall put them off in putting off our corruptible bodies; when debasement and sin will fall from us with this cumbrous frame of flesh, and only the spark of the spirit will remain,—the impalpable principle of light and thought, pure as when it left the Creator to inspire the creature: whence it came it will return; perhaps again to be communicated to some being higher than man—perhaps to pass through gradations of glory, from the pale human soul to brighten to the seraph!
His eye, as I have often said, was a black eye: it had now a tawny, nay, a bloody light in its gloom; and his face flushed—olive cheek and hueless forehead received a glow as from spreading, ascending heart-fire: and he stirred, lifted his strong arm—he could have struck Mason, dashed him on the church-floor, shocked by ruthless blow the breath from his body—but Mason shrank away, and cried faintly, “Good God!” Contempt fell cool on Mr. Rochester—his passion died as if a blight had shrivelled it up: he only asked—“What have you to say?”

An inaudible reply escaped Mason’s white lips.
“No dust, no canvas coverings: except that the air feels chilly, one would think they were inhabited daily.”

“Why, Miss Eyre, though Mr. Rochester’s visits here are rare, they are always sudden and unexpected; and as I observed that it put him out to find everything swathed up, and to have a bustle of arrangement on his arrival, I thought it best to keep the rooms in readiness.”

“Is Mr. Rochester an exacting, fastidious sort of man?”

“Not particularly so; but he has a gentleman’s tastes and habits, and he expects to have things managed in conformity to them.”

“Do you like him?
Tell me now, fairy as you are—can’t you give me a charm, or a philter, or something of that sort, to make me a handsome man?”

“It would be past the power of magic, sir;” and, in thought, I added, “A loving eye is all the charm needed: to such you are handsome enough; or rather your sternness has a power beyond beauty.”

Mr. Rochester had sometimes read my unspoken thoughts with an acumen to me incomprehensible: in the present instance he took no notice of my abrupt vocal response; but he smiled at me with a certain smile he had of his own, and which he used but on rare occasions.
I, who had determined to hold myself independent of all social intercourse, and thanked my stars that, at length, I had lighted on a spot where it was next to impracticable—I, weak wretch, after maintaining till dusk a struggle with low spirits and solitude, was finally compelled to strike my colours; and under pretence of gaining information concerning the necessities of my establishment, I desired Mrs. Dean, when she brought in supper, to sit down while I ate it; hoping sincerely she would prove a regular gossip, and either rouse me to animation or lull me to sleep by her talk.
“Miss Eyre, have you ever lived in a town?”

“No, sir.”

“Have you seen much society?”

“None but the pupils and teachers of Lowood, and now the inmates of Thornfield.”

“Have you read much?”

“Only such books as came in my way; and they have not been numerous or very learned.”

“You have lived the life of a nun: no doubt you are well drilled in religious forms;—Brocklehurst, who I understand directs Lowood, is a parson, is he not?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And you girls probably worshipped him, as a convent full of religieuses would worship their director.”

“Oh, no.”

“You are very cool!
I am afraid your principles on some points are eccentric.”

“My principles were never trained, Jane: they may have grown a little awry for want of attention.”

“Once again, seriously; may I enjoy the great good that has been vouchsafed to me, without fearing that any one else is suffering the bitter pain I myself felt a while ago?”

“That you may, my good little girl: there is not another being in the world has the same pure love for me as yourself—for I lay that pleasant unction to my soul, Jane, a belief in your affection.”

I turned my lips to the hand that lay on my shoulder.
Seen now, in broad daylight, she looked tall, fair, and shapely; brown eyes with a benignant light in their irids, and a fine pencilling of long lashes round, relieved the whiteness of her large front; on each of her temples her hair, of a very dark brown, was clustered in round curls, according to the fashion of those times, when neither smooth bands nor long ringlets were in vogue; her dress, also in the mode of the day, was of purple cloth, relieved by a sort of Spanish trimming of black velvet; a gold watch (watches were not so common then as now) shone at her girdle.
“I should think you ought to be at home yourself,” said he, “if you have a home in this neighbourhood: where do you come from?”

“From just below; and I am not at all afraid of being out late when it is moonlight: I will run over to Hay for you with pleasure, if you wish it: indeed, I am going there to post a letter.”

“You live just below—do you mean at that house with the battlements?” pointing to Thornfield Hall, on which the moon cast a hoary gleam, bringing it out distinct and pale from the woods that, by contrast with the western sky, now seemed one mass of shadow.
I would never think of running a hundred miles to see an old lady who will, perhaps, be dead before you reach her: besides, you say she cast you off.”

“Yes, sir, but that is long ago; and when her circumstances were very different: I could not be easy to neglect her wishes now.”

“How long will you stay?”

“As short a time as possible, sir.”

“Promise me only to stay a week—”

“I had better not pass my word: I might be obliged to break it.”

“At all events you will come back: you will not be induced under any pretext to take up a permanent residence with her?”

“Oh, no!
And far rather would I be condemned to a perpetual dwelling in the infernal regions than, even for one night, abide beneath the roof of Wuthering Heights again.”

Isabella ceased speaking, and took a drink of tea; then she rose, and bidding me put on her bonnet, and a great shawl I had brought, and turning a deaf ear to my entreaties for her to remain another hour, she stepped on to a chair, kissed Edgar’s and Catherine’s portraits, bestowed a similar salute on me, and descended to the carriage, accompanied by Fanny, who yelped wild with joy at recovering her mistress.
I know nothing about advertising.”

Replies rose smooth and prompt now:—

“You must enclose the advertisement and the money to pay for it under a cover directed to the editor of the Herald; you must put it, the first opportunity you have, into the post at Lowton; answers must be addressed to J.E., at the post-office there; you can go and inquire in about a week after you send your letter, if any are come, and act accordingly.”

This scheme I went over twice, thrice; it was then digested in my mind; I had it in a clear practical form: I felt satisfied, and fell asleep.
That sky with its high and light clouds which are sure to melt away as the day waxes warm—this placid and balmly atmosphere?”

“I do, very much.”

“You have passed a strange night, Jane.”

“Yes, sir.”

“And it has made you look pale—were you afraid when I left you alone with Mason?”

“I was afraid of some one coming out of the inner room.”

“But I had fastened the door—I had the key in my pocket: I should have been a careless shepherd if I had left a lamb—my pet lamb—so near a wolf’s den, unguarded: you were safe.”

“Will Grace Poole live here still, sir?”

“Oh yes!
The morning had been a quiet morning enough—all except the brief scene with the lunatic: the transaction in the church had not been noisy; there was no explosion of passion, no loud altercation, no dispute, no defiance or challenge, no tears, no sobs: a few words had been spoken, a calmly pronounced objection to the marriage made; some stern, short questions put by Mr. Rochester; answers, explanations given, evidence adduced; an open admission of the truth had been uttered by my master; then the living proof had been seen; the intruders were gone, and all was over.
I had finished: Miss Temple regarded me a few minutes in silence; she then said—

“I know something of Mr. Lloyd; I shall write to him; if his reply agrees with your statement, you shall be publicly cleared from every imputation; to me, Jane, you are clear now.”

She kissed me, and still keeping me at her side (where I was well contented to stand, for I derived a child’s pleasure from the contemplation of her face, her dress, her one or two ornaments, her white forehead, her clustered and shining curls, and beaming dark eyes), she proceeded to address Helen Burns.
The furniture once appropriated to the lower apartments had from time to time been removed here, as fashions changed: and the imperfect light entering by their narrow casement showed bedsteads of a hundred years old; chests in oak or walnut, looking, with their strange carvings of palm branches and cherubs’ heads, like types of the Hebrew ark; rows of venerable chairs, high-backed and narrow; stools still more antiquated, on whose cushioned tops were yet apparent traces of half-effaced embroideries, wrought by fingers that for two generations had been coffin-dust.
Mrs. Reed occupied her usual seat by the fireside; she made a signal to me to approach; I did so, and she introduced me to the stony stranger with the words: “This is the little girl respecting whom I applied to you.”

He, for it was a man, turned his head slowly towards where I stood, and having examined me with the two inquisitive-looking grey eyes which twinkled under a pair of bushy brows, said solemnly, and in a bass voice, “Her size is small: what is her age?”

“Ten years.”

“So much?” was the doubtful answer; and he prolonged his scrutiny for some minutes.
I wish you could dismiss that apathy out of that countenance, and look rather more anxious about me.”

The stolidity with which I received these instructions was, no doubt, rather exasperating: for they were delivered in perfect sincerity; but I believed a person who could plan the turning of her fits of passion to account, beforehand, might, by exerting her will, manage to control herself tolerably, even while under their influence; and I did not wish to “frighten” her husband, as she said, and multiply his annoyances for the purpose of serving her selfishness.
There were exclamations of “What a mercy master was not burnt in his bed!” “It is always dangerous to keep a candle lit at night.” “How providential that he had presence of mind to think of the water-jug!” “I wonder he waked nobody!” “It is to be hoped he will not take cold with sleeping on the library sofa,” &c.

To much confabulation succeeded a sound of scrubbing and setting to rights; and when I passed the room, in going downstairs to dinner, I saw through the open door that all was again restored to complete order; only the bed was stripped of its hangings.
“And your will shall decide your destiny,” he said: “I offer you my hand, my heart, and a share of all my possessions.”

“You play a farce, which I merely laugh at.”

“I ask you to pass through life at my side—to be my second self, and best earthly companion.”

“For that fate you have already made your choice, and must abide by it.”

“Jane, be still a few moments: you are over-excited: I will be still too.”

A waft of wind came sweeping down the laurel-walk, and trembled through the boughs of the chestnut: it wandered away—away—to an indefinite distance—it died.
If even this stranger had smiled and been good-humoured to me when I addressed him; if he had put off my offer of assistance gaily and with thanks, I should have gone on my way and not felt any vocation to renew inquiries: but the frown, the roughness of the traveller, set me at my ease: I retained my station when he waved to me to go, and announced—

“I cannot think of leaving you, sir, at so late an hour, in this solitary lane, till I see you are fit to mount your horse.”

He looked at me when I said this; he had hardly turned his eyes in my direction before.
Before passing the threshold, I paused to admire a quantity of grotesque carving lavished over the front, and especially about the principal door; above which, among a wilderness of crumbling griffins and shameless little boys, I detected the date “1500,” and the name “Hareton Earnshaw.” I would have made a few comments, and requested a short history of the place from the surly owner; but his attitude at the door appeared to demand my speedy entrance, or complete departure, and I had no desire to aggravate his impatience previous to inspecting the penetralium.
Most of the books were locked up behind glass doors; but there was one bookcase left open containing everything that could be needed in the way of elementary works, and several volumes of light literature, poetry, biography, travels, a few romances, &c. I suppose he had considered that these were all the governess would require for her private perusal; and, indeed, they contented me amply for the present; compared with the scanty pickings I had now and then been able to glean at Lowood, they seemed to offer an abundant harvest of entertainment and information.
That night, on going to bed, I forgot to prepare in imagination the Barmecide supper of hot roast potatoes, or white bread and new milk, with which I was wont to amuse my inward cravings: I feasted instead on the spectacle of ideal drawings, which I saw in the dark; all the work of my own hands: freely pencilled houses and trees, picturesque rocks and ruins, Cuyp-like groups of cattle, sweet paintings of butterflies hovering over unblown roses, of birds picking at ripe cherries, of wren’s nests enclosing pearl-like eggs, wreathed about with young ivy sprays.
“It appears I come at an inopportune time, madam,” said he, “when my friend, Mr. Rochester, is from home; but I arrive from a very long journey, and I think I may presume so far on old and intimate acquaintance as to instal myself here till he returns.”

His manner was polite; his accent, in speaking, struck me as being somewhat unusual,—not precisely foreign, but still not altogether English: his age might be about Mr. Rochester’s,—between thirty and forty; his complexion was singularly sallow: otherwise he was a fine-looking man, at first sight especially.
I like you more than I can say; but I’ll not sink into a bathos of sentiment: and with this needle of repartee I’ll keep you from the edge of the gulf too; and, moreover, maintain by its pungent aid that distance between you and myself most conducive to our real mutual advantage.”

From less to more, I worked him up to considerable irritation; then, after he had retired, in dudgeon, quite to the other end of the room, I got up, and saying, “I wish you good-night, sir,” in my natural and wonted respectful manner, I slipped out by the side-door and got away.
I imagined myself only to be regretting my loss, and thinking how to repair it; but when my reflections were concluded, and I looked up and found that the afternoon was gone, and evening far advanced, another discovery dawned on me, namely, that in the interval I had undergone a transforming process; that my mind had put off all it had borrowed of Miss Temple—or rather that she had taken with her the serene atmosphere I had been breathing in her vicinity—and that now I was left in my natural element, and beginning to feel the stirring of old emotions.
Well then, on that mercenary ground, will you agree to let me hector a little?”

“No, sir, not on that ground; but, on the ground that you did forget it, and that you care whether or not a dependent is comfortable in his dependency, I agree heartily.”

“And will you consent to dispense with a great many conventional forms and phrases, without thinking that the omission arises from insolence?”

“I am sure, sir, I should never mistake informality for insolence: one I rather like, the other nothing free-born would submit to, even for a salary.”

“Humbug!
I was sheepishly retreating also; but Mr. Rochester followed me, and when we reached the wicket, he said—

“Turn back: on so lovely a night it is a shame to sit in the house; and surely no one can wish to go to bed while sunset is thus at meeting with moonrise.”

It is one of my faults, that though my tongue is sometimes prompt enough at an answer, there are times when it sadly fails me in framing an excuse; and always the lapse occurs at some crisis, when a facile word or plausible pretext is specially wanted to get me out of painful embarrassment.
Again the bell rang: all formed in file, two and two, and in that order descended the stairs and entered the cold and dimly lit schoolroom: here prayers were read by Miss Miller; afterwards she called out—

“Form classes!”

A great tumult succeeded for some minutes, during which Miss Miller repeatedly exclaimed, “Silence!” and “Order!” When it subsided, I saw them all drawn up in four semicircles, before four chairs, placed at the four tables; all held books in their hands, and a great book, like a Bible, lay on each table, before the vacant seat.
Ask me questions, and I will do my best to answer them.”

“Then, in the first place, do you agree with me that I have a right to be a little masterful, abrupt, perhaps exacting, sometimes, on the grounds I stated, namely, that I am old enough to be your father, and that I have battled through a varied experience with many men of many nations, and roamed over half the globe, while you have lived quietly with one set of people in one house?”

“Do as you please, sir.”

“That is no answer; or rather it is a very irritating, because a very evasive one.
I’m an angel!”

In this self-complacent conviction she departed; and the success of her fulfilled resolution was obvious on the morrow: Mr. Linton had not only abjured his peevishness (though his spirits seemed still subdued by Catherine’s exuberance of vivacity), but he ventured no objection to her taking Isabella with her to Wuthering Heights in the afternoon; and she rewarded him with such a summer of sweetness and affection in return as made the house a paradise for several days; both master and servants profiting from the perpetual sunshine.
A note was accordingly addressed to that lady, who returned for answer, that “I might do as I pleased: she had long relinquished all interference in my affairs.” This note went the round of the committee, and at last, after what appeared to me most tedious delay, formal leave was given me to better my condition if I could; and an assurance added, that as I had always conducted myself well, both as teacher and pupil, at Lowood, a testimonial of character and capacity, signed by the inspectors of that institution, should forthwith be furnished me.
From every enjoyment I was, of course, excluded: my share of the gaiety consisted in witnessing the daily apparelling of Eliza and Georgiana, and seeing them descend to the drawing-room, dressed out in thin muslin frocks and scarlet sashes, with hair elaborately ringletted; and afterwards, in listening to the sound of the piano or the harp played below, to the passing to and fro of the butler and footman, to the jingling of glass and china as refreshments were handed, to the broken hum of conversation as the drawing-room door opened and closed.
Mrs. Fairfax found you to train it; but now you know that it is the illegitimate offspring of a French opera-girl, you will perhaps think differently of your post and protégée: you will be coming to me some day with notice that you have found another place—that you beg me to look out for a new governess, &c.—Eh?”

“No: Adèle is not answerable for either her mother’s faults or yours: I have a regard for her; and now that I know she is, in a sense, parentless—forsaken by her mother and disowned by you, sir—I shall cling closer to her than before.
After a brief stay there, I shall bear my treasure to regions nearer the sun: to French vineyards and Italian plains; and she shall see whatever is famous in old story and in modern record: she shall taste, too, of the life of cities; and she shall learn to value herself by just comparison with others.”

“Shall I travel?—and with you, sir?”

“You shall sojourn at Paris, Rome, and Naples: at Florence, Venice, and Vienna: all the ground I have wandered over shall be re-trodden by you: wherever I stamped my hoof, your sylph’s foot shall step also.
“Well, is he?”

“I think so: he is very changeful and abrupt.”

“True: no doubt he may appear so to a stranger, but I am so accustomed to his manner, I never think of it; and then, if he has peculiarities of temper, allowance should be made.”

“Why?”

“Partly because it is his nature—and we can none of us help our nature; and partly because he has painful thoughts, no doubt, to harass him, and make his spirits unequal.”

“What about?”

“Family troubles, for one thing.”

“But he has no family.”

“Not now, but he has had—or, at least, relatives.
There was nothing like them in these parts, nor ever had been; they had liked learning, all three, almost from the time they could speak; and they had always been “of a mak’ of their own.” Mr. St. John, when he grew up, would go to college and be a parson; and the girls, as soon as they left school, would seek places as governesses: for they had told her their father had some years ago lost a great deal of money by a man he had trusted turning bankrupt; and as he was now not rich enough to give them fortunes, they must provide for themselves.
“Chez maman,” said she, “quand il y avait du monde, je le suivais partout, au salon et à leurs chambres; souvent je regardais les femmes de chambre coiffer et habiller les dames, et c’était si amusant: comme cela on apprend.”

“Don’t you feel hungry, Adèle?”

“Mais oui, mademoiselle: voilà cinq ou six heures que nous n’avons pas mangé.”

“Well now, while the ladies are in their rooms, I will venture down and get you something to eat.”

And issuing from my asylum with precaution, I sought a back-stairs which conducted directly to the kitchen.
This world is pleasant—it would be dreary to be called from it, and to have to go who knows where?”

And then my mind made its first earnest effort to comprehend what had been infused into it concerning heaven and hell; and for the first time it recoiled, baffled; and for the first time glancing behind, on each side, and before it, it saw all round an unfathomed gulf: it felt the one point where it stood—the present; all the rest was formless cloud and vacant depth; and it shuddered at the thought of tottering, and plunging amid that chaos.
But where there are no obstacles to a union, as in the present case, where the connection is in every point desirable, delays are unnecessary: they will be married as soon as S—— Place, which Sir Frederic gives up to them, can be refitted for their reception.”

The first time I found St. John alone after this communication, I felt tempted to inquire if the event distressed him: but he seemed so little to need sympathy, that, so far from venturing to offer him more, I experienced some shame at the recollection of what I had already hazarded.
My father, indeed, imposed the determination, but since his death, I have not a legitimate obstacle to contend with; some affairs settled, a successor for Morton provided, an entanglement or two of the feelings broken through or cut asunder—a last conflict with human weakness, in which I know I shall overcome, because I have vowed that I will overcome—and I leave Europe for the East.”

He said this, in his peculiar, subdued, yet emphatic voice; looking, when he had ceased speaking, not at me, but at the setting sun, at which I looked too.
As I walked by his side homeward, I read well in his iron silence all he felt towards me: the disappointment of an austere and despotic nature, which has met resistance where it expected submission—the disapprobation of a cool, inflexible judgment, which has detected in another feelings and views in which it has no power to sympathise: in short, as a man, he would have wished to coerce me into obedience: it was only as a sincere Christian he bore so patiently with my perversity, and allowed so long a space for reflection and repentance.
“We were quarrelling like cats about you, Heathcliff; and I was fairly beaten in protestations of devotion and admiration: and, moreover, I was informed that if I would but have the manners to stand aside, my rival, as she will have herself to be, would shoot a shaft into your soul that would fix you for ever, and send my image into eternal oblivion!”

“Catherine!” said Isabella, calling up her dignity, and disdaining to struggle from the tight grasp that held her, “I’d thank you to adhere to the truth and not slander me, even in joke!
My wretched feet, flayed and swollen to lameness by the sharp air of January, began to heal and subside under the gentler breathings of April; the nights and mornings no longer by their Canadian temperature froze the very blood in our veins; we could now endure the play-hour passed in the garden: sometimes on a sunny day it began even to be pleasant and genial, and a greenness grew over those brown beds, which, freshening daily, suggested the thought that Hope traversed them at night, and left each morning brighter traces of her steps.
I try to concentrate my attention on those netting-needles, on the meshes of the purse I am forming—I wish to think only of the work I have in my hands, to see only the silver beads and silk threads that lie in my lap; whereas, I distinctly behold his figure, and I inevitably recall the moment when I last saw it; just after I had rendered him, what he deemed, an essential service, and he, holding my hand, and looking down on my face, surveyed me with eyes that revealed a heart full and eager to overflow; in whose emotions I had a part.
It was his nature to be communicative; he liked to open to a mind unacquainted with the world glimpses of its scenes and ways (I do not mean its corrupt scenes and wicked ways, but such as derived their interest from the great scale on which they were acted, the strange novelty by which they were characterised); and I had a keen delight in receiving the new ideas he offered, in imagining the new pictures he portrayed, and following him in thought through the new regions he disclosed, never startled or troubled by one noxious allusion.
“Everybody knows you are the most selfish, heartless creature in existence: and I know your spiteful hatred towards me: I have had a specimen of it before in the trick you played me about Lord Edwin Vere: you could not bear me to be raised above you, to have a title, to be received into circles where you dare not show your face, and so you acted the spy and informer, and ruined my prospects for ever.” Georgiana took out her handkerchief and blew her nose for an hour afterwards; Eliza sat cold, impassable, and assiduously industrious.
I charged them to conceal from you, before I ever saw you, all knowledge of the curse of the place; merely because I feared Adèle never would have a governess to stay if she knew with what inmate she was housed, and my plans would not permit me to remove the maniac elsewhere—though I possess an old house, Ferndean Manor, even more retired and hidden than this, where I could have lodged her safely enough, had not a scruple about the unhealthiness of the situation, in the heart of a wood, made my conscience recoil from the arrangement.
And I began, half dreaming, to weary myself with imagining some fit parentage for him; and, repeating my waking meditations, I tracked his existence over again, with grim variations; at last, picturing his death and funeral: of which, all I can remember is, being exceedingly vexed at having the task of dictating an inscription for his monument, and consulting the sexton about it; and, as he had no surname, and we could not tell his age, we were obliged to content ourselves with the single word, “Heathcliff.” That came true: we were.
Provided with a case of pencils, and some sheets of paper, I used to take a seat apart from them, near the window, and busy myself in sketching fancy vignettes, representing any scene that happened momentarily to shape itself in the ever-shifting kaleidoscope of imagination: a glimpse of sea between two rocks; the rising moon, and a ship crossing its disk; a group of reeds and water-flags, and a naiad’s head, crowned with lotus-flowers, rising out of them; an elf sitting in a hedge-sparrow’s nest, under a wreath of hawthorn-bloom.
Have you ever heard anything from your father’s kinsfolk, the Eyres?”

“Never in my life.”

“Well, you know Missis always said they were poor and quite despicable: and they may be poor; but I believe they are as much gentry as the Reeds are; for one day, nearly seven years ago, a Mr. Eyre came to Gateshead and wanted to see you; Missis said you were at school fifty miles off; he seemed so much disappointed, for he could not stay: he was going on a voyage to a foreign country, and the ship was to sail from London in a day or two.
Me, she had dispensed from joining the group; saying, “She regretted to be under the necessity of keeping me at a distance; but that until she heard from Bessie, and could discover by her own observation, that I was endeavouring in good earnest to acquire a more sociable and childlike disposition, a more attractive and sprightly manner—something lighter, franker, more natural, as it were—she really must exclude me from privileges intended only for contented, happy, little children.”

“What does Bessie say I have done?” I asked.
As we passed Mrs. Reed’s bedroom, she said, “Will you go in and bid Missis good-bye?”

“No, Bessie: she came to my crib last night when you were gone down to supper, and said I need not disturb her in the morning, or my cousins either; and she told me to remember that she had always been my best friend, and to speak of her and be grateful to her accordingly.”

“What did you say, Miss?”

“Nothing: I covered my face with the bedclothes, and turned from her to the wall.”

“That was wrong, Miss Jane.”

“It was quite right, Bessie.
“Madam,” he pursued, “I have a Master to serve whose kingdom is not of this world: my mission is to mortify in these girls the lusts of the flesh; to teach them to clothe themselves with shame-facedness and sobriety, not with braided hair and costly apparel; and each of the young persons before us has a string of hair twisted in plaits which vanity itself might have woven; these, I repeat, must be cut off; think of the time wasted, of—”

Mr. Brocklehurst was here interrupted: three other visitors, ladies, now entered the room.
I may then depend upon this child being received as a pupil at Lowood, and there being trained in conformity to her position and prospects?”

“Madam, you may: she shall be placed in that nursery of chosen plants, and I trust she will show herself grateful for the inestimable privilege of her election.”

“I will send her, then, as soon as possible, Mr. Brocklehurst; for, I assure you, I feel anxious to be relieved of a responsibility that was becoming too irksome.”

“No doubt, no doubt, madam; and now I wish you good morning.
The play-hour in the evening I thought the pleasantest fraction of the day at Lowood: the bit of bread, the draught of coffee swallowed at five o’clock had revived vitality, if it had not satisfied hunger: the long restraint of the day was slackened; the schoolroom felt warmer than in the morning—its fires being allowed to burn a little more brightly, to supply, in some measure, the place of candles, not yet introduced: the ruddy gloaming, the licensed uproar, the confusion of many voices gave one a welcome sense of liberty.
He is not of your order: keep to your caste, and be too self-respecting to lavish the love of the whole heart, soul, and strength, where such a gift is not wanted and would be despised.”

I went on with my day’s business tranquilly; but ever and anon vague suggestions kept wandering across my brain of reasons why I should quit Thornfield; and I kept involuntarily framing advertisements and pondering conjectures about new situations: these thoughts I did not think to check; they might germinate and bear fruit if they could.
I had a similar notion; and, remembering Mrs. Dean’s anecdote of his first attempt at enlightening the darkness in which he had been reared, I observed,—“But, Mrs. Heathcliff, we have each had a commencement, and each stumbled and tottered on the threshold; had our teachers scorned instead of aiding us, we should stumble and totter yet.”

“Oh!” she replied, “I don’t wish to limit his acquirements: still, he has no right to appropriate what is mine, and make it ridiculous to me with his vile mistakes and mispronunciations!
He was, in short, in his after-dinner mood; more expanded and genial, and also more self-indulgent than the frigid and rigid temper of the morning; still he looked preciously grim, cushioning his massive head against the swelling back of his chair, and receiving the light of the fire on his granite-hewn features, and in his great, dark eyes; for he had great, dark eyes, and very fine eyes, too—not without a certain change in their depths sometimes, which, if it was not softness, reminded you, at least, of that feeling.
What charade Colonel Dent and his party played, what word they chose, how they acquitted themselves, I no longer remember; but I still see the consultation which followed each scene: I see Mr. Rochester turn to Miss Ingram, and Miss Ingram to him; I see her incline her head towards him, till the jetty curls almost touch his shoulder and wave against his cheek; I hear their mutual whisperings; I recall their interchanged glances; and something even of the feeling roused by the spectacle returns in memory at this moment.
“All day had been flooding with rain; we could not go to church, so Joseph must needs get up a congregation in the garret; and, while Hindley and his wife basked downstairs before a comfortable fire—doing anything but reading their Bibles, I’ll answer for it—Heathcliff, myself, and the unhappy ploughboy were commanded to take our prayer-books, and mount: we were ranged in a row, on a sack of corn, groaning and shivering, and hoping that Joseph would shiver too, so that he might give us a short homily for his own sake.
This was when I chanced to see the third-storey staircase door (which of late had always been kept locked) open slowly, and give passage to the form of Grace Poole, in prim cap, white apron, and handkerchief; when I watched her glide along the gallery, her quiet tread muffled in a list slipper; when I saw her look into the bustling, topsy-turvy bedrooms,—just say a word, perhaps, to the charwoman about the proper way to polish a grate, or clean a marble mantelpiece, or take stains from papered walls, and then pass on.
I was now too fond of you often to simulate the first whim; and, when I stretched my hand out cordially, such bloom and light and bliss rose to your young, wistful features, I had much ado often to avoid straining you then and there to my heart.”

“Don’t talk any more of those days, sir,” I interrupted, furtively dashing away some tears from my eyes; his language was torture to me; for I knew what I must do—and do soon—and all these reminiscences, and these revelations of his feelings only made my work more difficult.
“This, then, was his father’s residence?”

“Aye; old Mr. Rivers lived here, and his father, and grandfather, and gurt (great) grandfather afore him.”

“The name, then, of that gentleman, is Mr. St. John Rivers?”

“Aye; St. John is like his kirstened name.”

“And his sisters are called Diana and Mary Rivers?”

“Yes.”

“Their father is dead?”

“Dead three weeks sin’ of a stroke.”

“They have no mother?”

“The mistress has been dead this mony a year.”

“Have you lived with the family long?”

“I’ve lived here thirty year.
You look quite red, as if you had been about some mischief: what were you opening the window for?”

I was spared the trouble of answering, for Bessie seemed in too great a hurry to listen to explanations; she hauled me to the washstand, inflicted a merciless, but happily brief scrub on my face and hands with soap, water, and a coarse towel; disciplined my head with a bristly brush, denuded me of my pinafore, and then hurrying me to the top of the stairs, bid me go down directly, as I was wanted in the breakfast-room.
And as for the vague something—was it a sinister or a sorrowful, a designing or a desponding expression?—that opened upon a careful observer, now and then, in his eye, and closed again before one could fathom the strange depth partially disclosed; that something which used to make me fear and shrink, as if I had been wandering amongst volcanic-looking hills, and had suddenly felt the ground quiver and seen it gape: that something, I, at intervals, beheld still; and with throbbing heart, but not with palsied nerves.
The mistress visited her often in the interval, and commenced her plan of reform by trying to raise her self-respect with fine clothes and flattery, which she took readily; so that, instead of a wild, hatless little savage jumping into the house, and rushing to squeeze us all breathless, there “lighted from a handsome black pony a very dignified person, with brown ringlets falling from the cover of a feathered beaver, and a long cloth habit, which she was obliged to hold up with both hands that she might sail in.
But one day, when she had been peculiarly wayward, rejecting her breakfast, complaining that the servants did not do what she told them; that the mistress would allow her to be nothing in the house, and Edgar neglected her; that she had caught a cold with the doors being left open, and we let the parlour fire go out on purpose to vex her, with a hundred yet more frivolous accusations, Mrs. Linton peremptorily insisted that she should get to bed; and, having scolded her heartily, threatened to send for the doctor.
“But deeds must prove it also; and after he is well, remember you don’t forget resolutions formed in the hour of fear.”

As we talked, we neared a door that opened on the road; and my young lady, lightening into sunshine again, climbed up and seated herself on the top of the wall, reaching over to gather some hips that bloomed scarlet on the summit branches of the wild-rose trees shadowing the highway side: the lower fruit had disappeared, but only birds could touch the upper, except from Cathy’s present station.
I pointed out this circumstance to Mrs. Fairfax, who was standing at the window with me—

“You said it was not likely they should think of being married,” said I, “but you see Mr. Rochester evidently prefers her to any of the other ladies.”

“Yes, I daresay: no doubt he admires her.”

“And she him,” I added; “look how she leans her head towards him as if she were conversing confidentially; I wish I could see her face; I have never had a glimpse of it yet.”

“You will see her this evening,” answered Mrs. Fairfax.
Ranged on benches down the sides of the room, the eighty girls sat motionless and erect; a quaint assemblage they appeared, all with plain locks combed from their faces, not a curl visible; in brown dresses, made high and surrounded by a narrow tucker about the throat, with little pockets of holland (shaped something like a Highlander’s purse) tied in front of their frocks, and destined to serve the purpose of a work-bag: all, too, wearing woollen stockings and country-made shoes, fastened with brass buckles.
You are not to suppose, reader, that Adèle has all this time been sitting motionless on the stool at my feet: no; when the ladies entered, she rose, advanced to meet them, made a stately reverence, and said with gravity—

“Bon jour, mesdames.”

And Miss Ingram had looked down at her with a mocking air, and exclaimed, “Oh, what a little puppet!”

Lady Lynn had remarked, “It is Mr. Rochester’s ward, I suppose—the little French girl he was speaking of.”

Mrs. Dent had kindly taken her hand, and given her a kiss.
I thought she was half silly, from her behaviour while that went on: she ran into her chamber, and made me come with her, though I should have been dressing the children: and there she sat shivering and clasping her hands, and asking repeatedly—“Are they gone yet?” Then she began describing with hysterical emotion the effect it produced on her to see black; and started, and trembled, and, at last, fell a-weeping—and when I asked what was the matter, answered, she didn’t know; but she felt so afraid of dying!
I have told you, reader, that I had learnt to love Mr. Rochester: I could not unlove him now, merely because I found that he had ceased to notice me—because I might pass hours in his presence, and he would never once turn his eyes in my direction—because I saw all his attentions appropriated by a great lady, who scorned to touch me with the hem of her robes as she passed; who, if ever her dark and imperious eye fell on me by chance, would withdraw it instantly as from an object too mean to merit observation.
When we got back from church, I went into the kitchen of the manor-house, where Mary was cooking the dinner and John cleaning the knives, and I said—

“Mary, I have been married to Mr. Rochester this morning.” The housekeeper and her husband were both of that decent phlegmatic order of people, to whom one may at any time safely communicate a remarkable piece of news without incurring the danger of having one’s ears pierced by some shrill ejaculation, and subsequently stunned by a torrent of wordy wonderment.
You seem to doubt me; I don’t doubt myself: I know what my aim is, what my motives are; and at this moment I pass a law, unalterable as that of the Medes and Persians, that both are right.”

“They cannot be, sir, if they require a new statute to legalise them.”

“They are, Miss Eyre, though they absolutely require a new statute: unheard-of combinations of circumstances demand unheard-of rules.”

“That sounds a dangerous maxim, sir; because one can see at once that it is liable to abuse.”

“Sententious sage!
“In that field, Adèle, I was walking late one evening about a fortnight since—the evening of the day you helped me to make hay in the orchard meadows; and, as I was tired with raking swaths, I sat down to rest me on a stile; and there I took out a little book and a pencil, and began to write about a misfortune that befell me long ago, and a wish I had for happy days to come: I was writing away very fast, though daylight was fading from the leaf, when something came up the path and stopped two yards off me.
They will have a great deal of money, and you will have none: it is your place to be humble, and to try to make yourself agreeable to them.”

“What we tell you is for your good,” added Bessie, in no harsh voice, “you should try to be useful and pleasant, then, perhaps, you would have a home here; but if you become passionate and rude, Missis will send you away, I am sure.”

“Besides,” said Miss Abbot, “God will punish her: He might strike her dead in the midst of her tantrums, and then where would she go?
His peevish reproofs wakened in her a naughty delight to provoke him: she was never so happy as when we were all scolding her at once, and she defying us with her bold, saucy look, and her ready words; turning Joseph’s religious curses into ridicule, baiting me, and doing just what her father hated most—showing how her pretended insolence, which he thought real, had more power over Heathcliff than his kindness: how the boy would do her bidding in anything, and his only when it suited his own inclination.
“To-morn, he’s come hisseln, and thrust him out, if ye darr!”

CHAPTER XX
To obviate the danger of this threat being fulfilled, Mr. Linton commissioned me to take the boy home early, on Catherine’s pony; and, said he—“As we shall now have no influence over his destiny, good or bad, you must say nothing of where he is gone to my daughter: she cannot associate with him hereafter, and it is better for her to remain in ignorance of his proximity; lest she should be restless, and anxious to visit the Heights.
It was a strange way of killing: not by inches, but by fractions of hairbreadths, to beguile me with the spectre of a hope through eighteen years!”

Mr. Heathcliff paused and wiped his forehead; his hair clung to it, wet with perspiration; his eyes were fixed on the red embers of the fire, the brows not contracted, but raised next the temples; diminishing the grim aspect of his countenance, but imparting a peculiar look of trouble, and a painful appearance of mental tension towards one absorbing subject.
The wondrous shock of feeling had come like the earthquake which shook the foundations of Paul and Silas’s prison; it had opened the doors of the soul’s cell and loosed its bands—it had wakened it out of its sleep, whence it sprang trembling, listening, aghast; then vibrated thrice a cry on my startled ear, and in my quaking heart and through my spirit, which neither feared nor shook, but exulted as if in joy over the success of one effort it had been privileged to make, independent of the cumbrous body.
Leaning over the battlements and looking far down, I surveyed the grounds laid out like a map: the bright and velvet lawn closely girdling the grey base of the mansion; the field, wide as a park, dotted with its ancient timber; the wood, dun and sere, divided by a path visibly overgrown, greener with moss than the trees were with foliage; the church at the gates, the road, the tranquil hills, all reposing in the autumn day’s sun; the horizon bounded by a propitious sky, azure, marbled with pearly white.
Mr. Rochester, you must neither expect nor exact anything celestial of me—for you will not get it, any more than I shall get it of you: which I do not at all anticipate.”

“What do you anticipate of me?”

“For a little while you will perhaps be as you are now,—a very little while; and then you will turn cool; and then you will be capricious; and then you will be stern, and I shall have much ado to please you: but when you get well used to me, you will perhaps like me again,—like me, I say, not love me.
God has given us, in a measure, the power to make our own fate; and when our energies seem to demand a sustenance they cannot get—when our will strains after a path we may not follow—we need neither starve from inanition, nor stand still in despair: we have but to seek another nourishment for the mind, as strong as the forbidden food it longed to taste—and perhaps purer; and to hew out for the adventurous foot a road as direct and broad as the one Fortune has blocked up against us, if rougher than it.
He merely added: “You will know hereafter, darling, why I wish you to avoid his house and family; now return to your old employments and amusements, and think no more about them.”

Catherine kissed her father, and sat down quietly to her lessons for a couple of hours, according to custom; then she accompanied him into the grounds, and the whole day passed as usual: but in the evening, when she had retired to her room, and I went to help her to undress, I found her crying, on her knees by the bedside.
She’ll snap at the master himself, and as good as dares him to thrash her; and the more hurt she gets, the more venomous she grows.”

At first, on hearing this account from Zillah, I determined to leave my situation, take a cottage, and get Catherine to come and live with me: but Mr. Heathcliff would as soon permit that as he would set up Hareton in an independent house; and I can see no remedy, at present, unless she could marry again; and that scheme it does not come within my province to arrange.
(calling to his sisters) Joan is not here: tell mama she is run out into the rain—bad animal!”

“It is well I drew the curtain,” thought I; and I wished fervently he might not discover my hiding-place: nor would John Reed have found it out himself; he was not quick either of vision or conception; but Eliza just put her head in at the door, and said at once—

“She is in the window-seat, to be sure, Jack.”

And I came out immediately, for I trembled at the idea of being dragged forth by the said Jack.
It seems to me, that if you tried hard, you would in time find it possible to become what you yourself would approve; and that if from this day you began with resolution to correct your thoughts and actions, you would in a few years have laid up a new and stainless store of recollections, to which you might revert with pleasure.”

“Justly thought; rightly said, Miss Eyre; and, at this moment, I am paving hell with energy.”

“Sir?”

“I am laying down good intentions, which I believe durable as flint.
He went to Millcote this morning, and will be back here to-night or to-morrow: does that circumstance exclude him from the list of your acquaintance—blot him, as it were, out of existence?”

“No; but I can scarcely see what Mr. Rochester has to do with the theme you had introduced.”

“I was talking of ladies smiling in the eyes of gentlemen; and of late so many smiles have been shed into Mr. Rochester’s eyes that they overflow like two cups filled above the brim: have you never remarked that?”

“Mr.
I had closed my shutter, laid a mat to the door to prevent the snow from blowing in under it, trimmed my fire, and after sitting nearly an hour on the hearth listening to the muffled fury of the tempest, I lit a candle, took down “Marmion,” and beginning—

“Day set on Norham’s castled steep,
And Tweed’s fair river broad and deep,
    And Cheviot’s mountains lone;
The massive towers, the donjon keep,
The flanking walls that round them sweep,
    In yellow lustre shone”—

I soon forgot storm in music.
One idea only still throbbed life-like within me—a remembrance of God: it begot an unuttered prayer: these words went wandering up and down in my rayless mind, as something that should be whispered, but no energy was found to express them—

“Be not far from me, for trouble is near: there is none to help.”

It was near: and as I had lifted no petition to Heaven to avert it—as I had neither joined my hands, nor bent my knees, nor moved my lips—it came: in full heavy swing the torrent poured over me.
She was slender, and apparently scarcely past girlhood: an admirable form, and the most exquisite little face that I have ever had the pleasure of beholding; small features, very fair; flaxen ringlets, or rather golden, hanging loose on her delicate neck; and eyes, had they been agreeable in expression, that would have been irresistible: fortunately for my susceptible heart, the only sentiment they evinced hovered between scorn and a kind of desperation, singularly unnatural to be detected there.
And he must have a fire in the middle of summer; and Joseph’s bacca-pipe is poison; and he must always have sweets and dainties, and always milk, milk for ever—heeding naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter; and there he’ll sit, wrapped in his furred cloak in his chair by the fire, with some toast and water or other slop on the hob to sip at; and if Hareton, for pity, comes to amuse him—Hareton is not bad-natured, though he’s rough—they’re sure to part, one swearing and the other crying.
“No, Jane, no: this world is not the scene of fruition; do not attempt to make it so: nor of rest; do not turn slothful.”

“I mean, on the contrary, to be busy.”

“Jane, I excuse you for the present: two months’ grace I allow you for the full enjoyment of your new position, and for pleasing yourself with this late-found charm of relationship; but then, I hope you will begin to look beyond Moor House and Morton, and sisterly society, and the selfish calm and sensual comfort of civilised affluence.
Shall I tell you of what it reminded me?”

“You may.”

“Of the foul German spectre—the Vampyre.”

“Ah!—what did it do?”

“Sir, it removed my veil from its gaunt head, rent it in two parts, and flinging both on the floor, trampled on them.”

It removed my veil from its gaunt head, rent it in two parts, and
flinging both on the floor, trampled on them
“Afterwards?”

“It drew aside the window-curtain and looked out; perhaps it saw dawn approaching, for, taking the candle, it retreated to the door.
“Yes, that is it—that is the very word.”

“So he went?”

“Yes; he did not stay many minutes in the house: Missis was very high with him; she called him afterwards a ‘sneaking tradesman.’ My Robert believes he was a wine-merchant.”

“Very likely,” I returned; “or perhaps clerk or agent to a wine-merchant.”

Bessie and I conversed about old times an hour longer, and then she was obliged to leave me: I saw her again for a few minutes the next morning at Lowton, while I was waiting for the coach.
To pass its threshold was to return to stagnation; to cross the silent hall, to ascend the darksome staircase, to seek my own lonely little room, and then to meet tranquil Mrs. Fairfax, and spend the long winter evening with her, and her only, was to quell wholly the faint excitement wakened by my walk,—to slip again over my faculties the viewless fetters of an uniform and too still existence; of an existence whose very privileges of security and ease I was becoming incapable of appreciating.
“It is strange,” I began, in the interval of swallowing one cup of tea and receiving another—“it is strange how custom can mould our tastes and ideas: many could not imagine the existence of happiness in a life of such complete exile from the world as you spend, Mr. Heathcliff; yet, I’ll venture to say, that, surrounded by your family, and with your amiable lady as the presiding genius over your home and heart—”

“My amiable lady!” he interrupted, with an almost diabolical sneer on his face.
I dare say he is clever, but I never had much conversation with him.”

“In what way is he peculiar?”

“I don’t know—it is not easy to describe—nothing striking, but you feel it when he speaks to you; you cannot be always sure whether he is in jest or earnest, whether he is pleased or the contrary; you don’t thoroughly understand him, in short—at least, I don’t: but it is of no consequence, he is a very good master.”

This was all the account I got from Mrs. Fairfax of her employer and mine.
I have forbidden Adèle to talk to me about her presents, and she is bursting with repletion; have the goodness to serve her as auditress and interlocutrice; it will be one of the most benevolent acts you ever performed.”

Adèle, indeed, no sooner saw Mrs. Fairfax, than she summoned her to her sofa, and there quickly filled her lap with the porcelain, the ivory, the waxen contents of her “boite;” pouring out, meantime, explanations and raptures in such broken English as she was mistress of.
That was his most perfect idea of heaven’s happiness: mine was rocking in a rustling green tree, with a west wind blowing, and bright white clouds flitting rapidly above; and not only larks, but throstles, and blackbirds, and linnets, and cuckoos pouring out music on every side, and the moors seen at a distance, broken into cool dusky dells; but close by great swells of long grass undulating in waves to the breeze; and woods and sounding water, and the whole world awake and wild with joy.
Diana and Mary were soon to leave Moor House, and return to the far different life and scene which awaited them, as governesses in a large, fashionable, south-of-England city, where each held a situation in families by whose wealthy and haughty members they were regarded only as humble dependents, and who neither knew nor sought out their innate excellences, and appreciated only their acquired accomplishments as they appreciated the skill of their cook or the taste of their waiting-woman.
“Has he grown weary of indulgence, and passed from passive to active hatred?”

Linton looked at me, but did not answer; and, after keeping her seat by his side another ten minutes, during which his head fell drowsily on his breast, and he uttered nothing except suppressed moans of exhaustion or pain, Cathy began to seek solace in looking for bilberries, and sharing the produce of her researches with me: she did not offer them to him, for she saw further notice would only weary and annoy.
One evening, while, with her usual child-like activity, and thoughtless yet not offensive inquisitiveness, she was rummaging the cupboard and the table-drawer of my little kitchen, she discovered first two French books, a volume of Schiller, a German grammar and dictionary, and then my drawing-materials and some sketches, including a pencil-head of a pretty little cherub-like girl, one of my scholars, and sundry views from nature, taken in the Vale of Morton and on the surrounding moors.
I rather think his appearance there was distasteful to Catherine; she was not artful, never played the coquette, and had evidently an objection to her two friends meeting at all; for when Heathcliff expressed contempt of Linton in his presence, she could not half coincide, as she did in his absence; and when Linton evinced disgust and antipathy to Heathcliff, she dared not treat his sentiments with indifference, as if depreciation of her playmate were of scarcely any consequence to her.
If I were mademoiselle, I would never consent to go with you.”

“She has consented: she has pledged her word.”

“But you can’t get her there; there is no road to the moon: it is all air; and neither you nor she can fly.”

“Adèle, look at that field.” We were now outside Thornfield gates, and bowling lightly along the smooth road to Millcote, where the dust was well laid by the thunderstorm, and, where the low hedges and lofty timber trees on each side glistened green and rain-refreshed.
My father and brother had not made my marriage known to their acquaintance; because, in the very first letter I wrote to apprise them of the union—having already begun to experience extreme disgust of its consequences, and, from the family character and constitution, seeing a hideous future opening to me—I added an urgent charge to keep it secret: and very soon the infamous conduct of the wife my father had selected for me was such as to make him blush to own her as his daughter-in-law.
“Well,” said he, “if you had committed a murder, and I had told you your crime was discovered, you could scarcely look more aghast.”

“It is a large sum—don’t you think there is a mistake?”

“No mistake at all.”

“Perhaps you have read the figures wrong—it may be two thousand!”

“It is written in letters, not figures,—twenty thousand.”

I again felt rather like an individual of but average gastronomical powers sitting down to feast alone at a table spread with provisions for a hundred.
Tenez, je crois que je vais danser!”

And spreading out her dress, she chasséed across the room till, having reached Mr. Rochester, she wheeled lightly round before him on tip-toe, then dropped on one knee at his feet, exclaiming—

“Monsieur, je vous remercie mille fois de votre bonté;” then rising, she added, “C’est comme cela que maman faisait, n’est-ce pas, monsieur?”

“Pre-cise-ly!” was the answer; “and, ‘comme cela,’ she charmed my English gold out of my British breeches’ pocket.
Jane, did you ever hear or know that I was not the eldest son of my house: that I had once a brother older than I?”

“I remember Mrs. Fairfax told me so once.”

“And did you ever hear that my father was an avaricious, grasping man?”

“I have understood something to that effect.”

“Well, Jane, being so, it was his resolution to keep the property together; he could not bear the idea of dividing his estate and leaving me a fair portion: all, he resolved, should go to my brother, Rowland.
Jane, you don’t like my narrative; you look almost sick—shall I defer the rest to another day?”

“No, sir, finish it now; I pity you—I do earnestly pity you.”

“Pity, Jane, from some people is a noxious and insulting sort of tribute, which one is justified in hurling back in the teeth of those who offer it; but that is the sort of pity native to callous, selfish hearts; it is a hybrid, egotistical pain at hearing of woes, crossed with ignorant contempt for those who have endured them.
“Yes: but remember, Jane, you promised to wake with me the night before my wedding.”

“I did; and I will keep my promise, for an hour or two at least: I have no wish to go to bed.”

“Are all your arrangements complete?”

“All, sir.”

“And on my part likewise,” he returned, “I have settled everything; and we shall leave Thornfield to-morrow, within half-an-hour after our return from church.”

“Very well, sir.”

“With what an extraordinary smile you uttered that word—‘very well,’ Jane!
“Hareton, I’ll leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and I’ll bring some more to-morrow.”

“Ony books that yah leave, I shall tak’ into th’ hahse,” said Joseph, “and it’ll be mitch if yah find ’em agean; soa, yah may plase yerseln!”

Cathy threatened that his library should pay for hers; and, smiling as she passed Hareton, went singing upstairs: lighter of heart, I venture to say, than ever she had been under that roof before; except, perhaps, during her earliest visits to Linton.
Fortunately, the beasts seemed more bent on stretching their paws, and yawning, and flourishing their tails, than devouring me alive; but they would suffer no resurrection, and I was forced to lie till their malignant masters pleased to deliver me: then, hatless and trembling with wrath, I ordered the miscreants to let me out—on their peril to keep me one minute longer—with several incoherent threats of retaliation that, in their indefinite depth of virulency, smacked of King Lear.
The Lowood constraint still clings to you somewhat; controlling your features, muffling your voice, and restricting your limbs; and you fear in the presence of a man and a brother—or father, or master, or what you will—to smile too gaily, speak too freely, or move too quickly: but, in time, I think you will learn to be natural with me, as I find it impossible to be conventional with you; and then your looks and movements will have more vivacity and variety than they dare offer now.
Do you sincerely wish me to be your wife?”

“I do; and if an oath is necessary to satisfy you, I swear it.”

“Then, sir, I will marry you.”

“Edward—my little wife!”

“Dear Edward!”

“Come to me—come to me entirely now,” said he; and added, in his deepest tone, speaking in my ear as his cheek was laid on mine, “Make my happiness—I will make yours.”

“God pardon me!” he subjoined ere long; “and man meddle not with me: I have her, and will hold her.”

“There is no one to meddle, sir.
Led by her, I passed from compartment to compartment, from passage to passage, of a large and irregular building; till, emerging from the total and somewhat dreary silence pervading that portion of the house we had traversed, we came upon the hum of many voices, and presently entered a wide, long room, with great deal tables, two at each end, on each of which burnt a pair of candles, and seated all round on benches, a congregation of girls of every age, from nine or ten to twenty.
Mr. Rochester asked me if I would like to go and live with him in England, and I said yes; for I knew Mr. Rochester before I knew Madame Frédéric, and he was always kind to me and gave me pretty dresses and toys: but you see he has not kept his word, for he has brought me to England, and now he is gone back again himself, and I never see him.”

After breakfast, Adèle and I withdrew to the library, which room, it appears, Mr. Rochester had directed should be used as the schoolroom.
The personage on the well-brink now seemed to accost her; to make some request:—“She hasted, let down her pitcher on her hand, and gave him to drink.” From the bosom of his robe he then produced a casket, opened it and showed magnificent bracelets and earrings; she acted astonishment and admiration; kneeling, he laid the treasure at her feet; incredulity and delight were expressed by her looks and gestures; the stranger fastened the bracelets on her arms and the rings in her ears.
There would be recesses in my mind which would be only mine, to which he never came, and sentiments growing there fresh and sheltered which his austerity could never blight, nor his measured warrior-march trample down: but as his wife—at his side always, and always restrained, and always checked—forced to keep the fire of my nature continually low, to compel it to burn inwardly and never utter a cry, though the imprisoned flame consumed vital after vital—this would be unendurable.
Here is a candle.”

“Is it necessary to change my frock?”

“Yes, you had better: I always dress for the evening when Mr. Rochester is here.”

This additional ceremony seemed somewhat stately; however, I repaired to my room, and, with Mrs. Fairfax’s aid, replaced my black stuff dress by one of black silk; the best and the only additional one I had, except one of light grey, which, in my Lowood notions of the toilette, I thought too fine to be worn, except on first-rate occasions.
“Well,” resumed Mr. Rochester, “if you disown parents, you must have some sort of kinsfolk: uncles and aunts?”

“No; none that I ever saw.”

“And your home?”

“I have none.”

“Where do your brothers and sisters live?”

“I have no brothers or sisters.”

“Who recommended you to come here?”

“I advertised, and Mrs. Fairfax answered my advertisement.”

“Yes,” said the good lady, who now knew what ground we were upon, “and I am daily thankful for the choice Providence led me to make.
Already I had made visible progress: that very morning I had reached the head of my class; Miss Miller had praised me warmly; Miss Temple had smiled approbation; she had promised to teach me drawing, and to let me learn French, if I continued to make similar improvement two months longer: and then I was well received by my fellow-pupils; treated as an equal by those of my own age, and not molested by any; now, here I lay again crushed and trodden on; and could I ever rise more?
A bed supported on massive pillars of mahogany, hung with curtains of deep red damask, stood out like a tabernacle in the centre; the two large windows, with their blinds always drawn down, were half shrouded in festoons and falls of similar drapery; the carpet was red; the table at the foot of the bed was covered with a crimson cloth; the walls were a soft fawn colour with a blush of pink in it; the wardrobe, the toilet-table, the chairs were of darkly polished old mahogany.
I am sure most people would have thought him an ugly man; yet there was so much unconscious pride in his port; so much ease in his demeanour; such a look of complete indifference to his own external appearance; so haughty a reliance on the power of other qualities, intrinsic or adventitious, to atone for the lack of mere personal attractiveness, that, in looking at him, one inevitably shared the indifference, and, even in a blind, imperfect sense, put faith in the confidence.
Though he had set aside yearly a portion of his income for my young lady’s fortune, he had a natural desire that she might retain—or at least return in a short time to—the house of her ancestors; and he considered her only prospect of doing that was by a union with his heir; he had no idea that the latter was failing almost as fast as himself; nor had any one, I believe: no doctor visited the Heights, and no one saw Master Heathcliff to make report of his condition among us.
Women are supposed to be very calm generally: but women feel just as men feel; they need exercise for their faculties, and a field for their efforts, as much as their brothers do; they suffer from too rigid a restraint, too absolute a stagnation, precisely as men would suffer; and it is narrow-minded in their more privileged fellow-creatures to say that they ought to confine themselves to making puddings and knitting stockings, to playing on the piano and embroidering bags.
I don’t know how many of the fine people at the Leas are coming with him: he sends directions for all the best bedrooms to be prepared; and the library and drawing-rooms are to be cleaned out; I am to get more kitchen hands from the George Inn, at Millcote, and from wherever else I can; and the ladies will bring their maids and the gentlemen their valets: so we shall have a full house of it.” And Mrs. Fairfax swallowed her breakfast and hastened away to commence operations.
“Absent from me a whole month, and forgetting me quite, I’ll be sworn!”

I knew there would be pleasure in meeting my master again, even though broken by the fear that he was so soon to cease to be my master, and by the knowledge that I was nothing to him: but there was ever in Mr. Rochester (so at least I thought) such a wealth of the power of communicating happiness, that to taste but of the crumbs he scattered to stray and stranger birds like me, was to feast genially.
If you have a fancy for anything in that line, away with you, sir, to the bazaars of Stamboul without delay, and lay out in extensive slave-purchases some of that spare cash you seem at a loss to spend satisfactorily here.”

“And what will you do, Janet, while I am bargaining for so many tons of flesh and such an assortment of black eyes?”

“I’ll be preparing myself to go out as a missionary to preach liberty to them that are enslaved—your harem inmates amongst the rest.
“Yes; I wish to know whether you have heard of any service I can offer myself to undertake?”

“I found or devised something for you three weeks ago; but as you seemed both useful and happy here—as my sisters had evidently become attached to you, and your society gave them unusual pleasure—I deemed it inexpedient to break in on your mutual comfort till their approaching departure from Marsh End should render yours necessary.”

“And they will go in three days now?” I said.
As he had said, there was probably nothing at all extraordinary in the substance of the narrative itself: a wealthy Englishman’s passion for a French dancer, and her treachery to him, were every-day matters enough, no doubt, in society; but there was something decidedly strange in the paroxysm of emotion which had suddenly seized him when he was in the act of expressing the present contentment of his mood, and his newly revived pleasure in the old hall and its environs.
Your garb and manner were restricted by rule; your air was often diffident, and altogether that of one refined by nature, but absolutely unused to society, and a good deal afraid of making herself disadvantageously conspicuous by some solecism or blunder; yet when addressed, you lifted a keen, a daring, and a glowing eye to your interlocutor’s face: there was penetration and power in each glance you gave; when plied by close questions, you found ready and round answers.
Linton sat in the great arm-chair half asleep; walking up to the fire, I began in a serious tone, partly meaning it to be true—

“‘As you don’t like me, Linton, and as you think I come on purpose to hurt you, and pretend that I do so every time, this is our last meeting: let us say good-bye; and tell Mr. Heathcliff that you have no wish to see me, and that he mustn’t invent any more falsehoods on the subject.’

“‘Sit down and take your hat off, Catherine,’ he answered.
“Oh, very well!” returned Miss Temple; “we must make it do, Barbara, I suppose.” And as the girl withdrew she added, smiling, “Fortunately, I have it in my power to supply deficiencies for this once.”

Having invited Helen and me to approach the table, and placed before each of us a cup of tea with one delicious but thin morsel of toast, she got up, unlocked a drawer, and taking from it a parcel wrapped in paper, disclosed presently to our eyes a good-sized seed-cake.
“I wonder what thoughts are busy in your heart during all the hours you sit in yonder room with the fine people flitting before you like shapes in a magic-lantern: just as little sympathetic communion passing between you and them as if they were really mere shadows of human forms, and not the actual substance.”

“I feel tired often, sleepy sometimes, but seldom sad.”

“Then you have some secret hope to buoy you up and please you with whispers of the future?”

“Not I.
“Yes—we came just now,” I said; “but he left me by the kitchen door; and when I would have gone in, your little boy played sentinel over the place, and frightened me off by the help of a bull-dog.”

“It’s well the hellish villain has kept his word!” growled my future host, searching the darkness beyond me in expectation of discovering Heathcliff; and then he indulged in a soliloquy of execrations, and threats of what he would have done had the “fiend” deceived him.
and though in the beginning she either left it at his approach, or quietly joined in my occupations, and shunned remarking or addressing him—and though he was always as sullen and silent as possible—after a while, she changed her behaviour, and became incapable of letting him alone: talking at him; commenting on his stupidity and idleness; expressing her wonder how he could endure the life he lived—how he could sit a whole evening staring into the fire, and dozing.
On the evening of the day on which I had seen Miss Scatcherd flog her pupil, Burns, I wandered as usual among the forms and tables and laughing groups without a companion, yet not feeling lonely: when I passed the windows, I now and then lifted a blind, and looked out; it snowed fast, a drift was already forming against the lower panes; putting my ear close to the window, I could distinguish from the gleeful tumult within, the disconsolate moan of the wind outside.
Yet it was merely a very pretty drawing-room, and within it a boudoir, both spread with white carpets, on which seemed laid brilliant garlands of flowers; both ceiled with snowy mouldings of white grapes and vine-leaves, beneath which glowed in rich contrast crimson couches and ottomans; while the ornaments on the pale Parian mantelpiece were of sparkling Bohemian glass, ruby red; and between the windows large mirrors repeated the general blending of snow and fire.
Would it not be strange, Die, to be chained for life to a man who regarded one but as a useful tool?”

“Insupportable—unnatural—out of the question!”

“And then,” I continued, “though I have only sisterly affection for him now, yet, if forced to be his wife, I can imagine the possibility of conceiving an inevitable, strange, torturing kind of love for him, because he is so talented; and there is often a certain heroic grandeur in his look, manner, and conversation.
On coming up from dinner, however, (N.B.—I dine between twelve and one o’clock; the housekeeper, a matronly lady, taken as a fixture along with the house, could not, or would not, comprehend my request that I might be served at five)—on mounting the stairs with this lazy intention, and stepping into the room, I saw a servant-girl on her knees surrounded by brushes and coal-scuttles, and raising an infernal dust as she extinguished the flames with heaps of cinders.
I was not aware any danger or annoyance was to be dreaded at Thornfield Hall: but in future” (and I laid marked stress on the words) “I shall take good care to make all secure before I venture to lie down.”

“It will be wise so to do,” was her answer: “this neighbourhood is as quiet as any I know, and I never heard of the hall being attempted by robbers since it was a house; though there are hundreds of pounds’ worth of plate in the plate-closet, as is well known.
Recall the august yet harmonious lineaments, the Grecian neck and bust; let the round and dazzling arm be visible, and the delicate hand; omit neither diamond ring nor gold bracelet; portray faithfully the attire, aërial lace and glistening satin, graceful scarf and golden rose; call it ‘Blanche, an accomplished lady of rank.’

“Whenever, in future, you should chance to fancy Mr. Rochester thinks well of you, take out these two pictures and compare them: say, ‘Mr.
The curate might set as many chapters as he pleased for Catherine to get by heart, and Joseph might thrash Heathcliff till his arm ached; they forgot everything the minute they were together again: at least the minute they had contrived some naughty plan of revenge; and many a time I’ve cried to myself to watch them growing more reckless daily, and I not daring to speak a syllable, for fear of losing the small power I still retained over the unfriended creatures.
I now hate the recollection of the time I passed with Céline, Giacinta, and Clara.”

I felt the truth of these words; and I drew from them the certain inference, that if I were so far to forget myself and all the teaching that had ever been instilled into me, as—under any pretext—with any justification—through any temptation—to become the successor of these poor girls, he would one day regard me with the same feeling which now in his mind desecrated their memory.
In vapid listlessness I leant my head against the window, and continued spelling over Catherine Earnshaw—Heathcliff—Linton, till my eyes closed; but they had not rested five minutes when a glare of white letters started from the dark, as vivid as spectres—the air swarmed with Catherines; and rousing myself to dispel the obtrusive name, I discovered my candle-wick reclining on one of the antique volumes, and perfuming the place with an odour of roasted calf-skin.
I bid him beware of rousing the master, and while he undressed and I waited to put out the candle, he continued—“Cathy and I escaped from the wash-house to have a ramble at liberty, and getting a glimpse of the Grange lights, we thought we would just go and see whether the Lintons passed their Sunday evenings standing shivering in corners, while their father and mother sat eating and drinking, and singing and laughing, and burning their eyes out before the fire.
I must see the light of the unsnuffed candle wane on my employment; the shadows darken on the wrought, antique tapestry round me, and grow black under the hangings of the vast old bed, and quiver strangely over the doors of a great cabinet opposite—whose front, divided into twelve panels, bore, in grim design, the heads of the twelve apostles, each enclosed in its separate panel as in a frame; while above them at the top rose an ebon crucifix and a dying Christ.
Meantime, let me ask myself one question—Which is better?—To have surrendered to temptation; listened to passion; made no painful effort—no struggle;—but to have sunk down in the silken snare; fallen asleep on the flowers covering it; wakened in a southern clime, amongst the luxuries of a pleasure villa: to have been now living in France, Mr. Rochester’s mistress; delirious with his love half my time—for he would—oh, yes, he would have loved me well for a while.
“It is strange,” pursued he, “that while I love Rosamond Oliver so wildly—with all the intensity, indeed, of a first passion, the object of which is exquisitely beautiful, graceful, fascinating—I experience at the same time a calm, unwarped consciousness that she would not make me a good wife; that she is not the partner suited to me; that I should discover this within a year after marriage; and that to twelve months’ rapture would succeed a lifetime of regret.
In spring and summer one got on better: sunshine and long days make such a difference; and then, just at the commencement of this autumn, little Adela Varens came and her nurse: a child makes a house alive all at once; and now you are here I shall be quite gay.”

My heart really warmed to the worthy lady as I heard her talk; and I drew my chair a little nearer to her, and expressed my sincere wish that she might find my company as agreeable as she anticipated.
Poole,” said she, addressing Grace, “the servants’ dinner will soon be ready: will you come down?”

“No; just put my pint of porter and bit of pudding on a tray, and I’ll carry it upstairs.”

“You’ll have some meat?”

“Just a morsel, and a taste of cheese, that’s all.”

“And the sago?”

“Never mind it at present: I shall be coming down before teatime: I’ll make it myself.”

The cook here turned to me, saying that Mrs. Fairfax was waiting for me: so I departed.
What if a former caprice (a freak very possible to a nature so sudden and headstrong as his) has delivered him into her power, and she now exercises over his actions a secret influence, the result of his own indiscretion, which he cannot shake off, and dare not disregard?” But, having reached this point of conjecture, Mrs. Poole’s square, flat figure, and uncomely, dry, even coarse face, recurred so distinctly to my mind’s eye, that I thought, “No; impossible!
He did not abstain from conversing with me: he even called me as usual each morning to join him at his desk; and I fear the corrupt man within him had a pleasure unimparted to, and unshared by, the pure Christian, in evincing with what skill he could, while acting and speaking apparently just as usual, extract from every deed and every phrase the spirit of interest and approval which had formerly communicated a certain austere charm to his language and manner.
I was never so beaten with anything in my life: but you must e’en take it as a gift of God; though it’s as dark almost as if it came from the devil.”

We crowded round, and over Miss Cathy’s head I had a peep at a dirty, ragged, black-haired child; big enough both to walk and talk: indeed, its face looked older than Catherine’s; yet when it was set on its feet, it only stared round, and repeated over and over again some gibberish that nobody could understand.
And so it was: he turned abruptly, hastened into the house again, shut the door behind him; and when I went in a while after to inform them that Earnshaw had come home rabid drunk, ready to pull the whole place about our ears (his ordinary frame of mind in that condition), I saw the quarrel had merely effected a closer intimacy—had broken the outworks of youthful timidity, and enabled them to forsake the disguise of friendship, and confess themselves lovers.
But then he won’t go into danger of temptation: he never enters the parlour, and should Linton show those ways in the house where he is, he sends him upstairs directly.”

I divined, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy had rendered young Heathcliff selfish and disagreeable, if he were not so originally; and my interest in him, consequently, decayed: though still I was moved with a sense of grief at his lot, and a wish that he had been left with us.
All looked colder and darker in that visionary hollow than in reality: and the strange little figure there gazing at me, with a white face and arms specking the gloom, and glittering eyes of fear moving where all else was still, had the effect of a real spirit: I thought it like one of the tiny phantoms, half fairy, half imp, Bessie’s evening stories represented as coming out of lone, ferny dells in moors, and appearing before the eyes of belated travellers.
“Throw it,” he replied, standing still, “and then I’ll tell how you boasted that you would turn me out of doors as soon as he died, and see whether he will not turn you out directly.” Hindley threw it, hitting him on the breast, and down he fell, but staggered up immediately, breathless and white; and, had not I prevented it, he would have gone just so to the master, and got full revenge by letting his condition plead for him, intimating who had caused it.
So you’ll do no more than say Farewell, Jane?”

“It is enough, sir: as much good-will may be conveyed in one hearty word as in many.”

“Very likely; but it is blank and cool—‘Farewell.’”

“How long is he going to stand with his back against that door?” I asked myself; “I want to commence my packing.” The dinner-bell rang, and suddenly away he bolted, without another syllable: I saw him no more during the day, and was off before he had risen in the morning.
They clung to the purple moors behind and around their dwelling—to the hollow vale into which the pebbly bridle-path leading from their gate descended, and which wound between fern-banks first, and then amongst a few of the wildest little pasture-fields that ever bordered a wilderness of heath, or gave sustenance to a flock of grey moorland sheep, with their little mossy-faced lambs:—they clung to this scene, I say, with a perfect enthusiasm of attachment.
And now vegetation matured with vigour; Lowood shook loose its tresses; it became all green, all flowery; its great elm, ash, and oak skeletons were restored to majestic life; woodland plants sprang up profusely in its recesses; unnumbered varieties of moss filled its hollows, and it made a strange ground-sunshine out of the wealth of its wild primrose plants: I have seen their pale gold gleam in overshadowed spots like scatterings of the sweetest lustre.
there is something singular about you,” said he: “you have the air of a little nonnette; quaint, quiet, grave, and simple, as you sit with your hands before you, and your eyes generally bent on the carpet (except, by-the-bye, when they are directed piercingly to my face; as just now, for instance); and when one asks you a question, or makes a remark to which you are obliged to reply, you rap out a round rejoinder, which, if not blunt, is at least brusque.
Merely tell her his father sent for him suddenly, and he has been obliged to leave us.”

Linton was very reluctant to be roused from his bed at five o’clock, and astonished to be informed that he must prepare for further travelling; but I softened off the matter by stating that he was going to spend some time with his father, Mr. Heathcliff, who wished to see him so much, he did not like to defer the pleasure till he should recover from his late journey.
JANE EYRE
AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY
by Charlotte Brontë
ILLUSTRATED BY F. H. TOWNSEND

London
SERVICE & PATON
5 HENRIETTA STREET
1897

The Illustrations
in this Volume are the copyright of
SERVICE & PATON, London

TO
W. M. THACKERAY, ESQ.,

This Work
IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED

BY
THE AUTHOR

PREFACE
A preface to the first edition of “Jane Eyre” being unnecessary, I gave none: this second edition demands a few words both of acknowledgment and miscellaneous remark.
And if you are inclined to despise the day of small things, seek some more efficient succour than such as I can offer.”

“She has already said that she is willing to do anything honest she can do,” answered Diana for me; “and you know, St. John, she has no choice of helpers: she is forced to put up with such crusty people as you.”

“I will be a dressmaker; I will be a plain-workwoman; I will be a servant, a nurse-girl, if I can be no better,” I answered.
Bessie, when she heard this narrative, sighed and said, “Poor Miss Jane is to be pitied, too, Abbot.”

“Yes,” responded Abbot; “if she were a nice, pretty child, one might compassionate her forlornness; but one really cannot care for such a little toad as that.”

“Not a great deal, to be sure,” agreed Bessie: “at any rate, a beauty like Miss Georgiana would be more moving in the same condition.”

“Yes, I doat on Miss Georgiana!” cried the fervent Abbot.
Its garden, too, glowed with flowers: hollyhocks had sprung up tall as trees, lilies had opened, tulips and roses were in bloom; the borders of the little beds were gay with pink thrift and crimson double daisies; the sweetbriars gave out, morning and evening, their scent of spice and apples; and these fragrant treasures were all useless for most of the inmates of Lowood, except to furnish now and then a handful of herbs and blossoms to put in a coffin.
It was verging on dusk, and the clock had already given warning of the hour to dress for dinner, when little Adèle, who knelt by me in the drawing-room window-seat, suddenly exclaimed—

“Voilà Monsieur Rochester, qui revient!”

I turned, and Miss Ingram darted forwards from her sofa: the others, too, looked up from their several occupations; for at the same time a crunching of wheels and a splashing tramp of horse-hoofs became audible on the wet gravel.
Mrs. Fairfax was summoned to give information respecting the resources of the house in shawls, dresses, draperies of any kind; and certain wardrobes of the third storey were ransacked, and their contents, in the shape of brocaded and hooped petticoats, satin sacques, black modes, lace lappets, &c., were brought down in armfuls by the abigails; then a selection was made, and such things as were chosen were carried to the boudoir within the drawing-room.
I wondered what it meant: I wondered, too, at the punctual satisfaction he never failed to exhibit on an occasion that seemed to me of small moment, namely, my weekly visit to Morton school; and still more was I puzzled when, if the day was unfavourable, if there was snow, or rain, or high wind, and his sisters urged me not to go, he would invariably make light of their solicitude, and encourage me to accomplish the task without regard to the elements.
I never spoke to it, and it never spoke to me, in words; but I read its eyes, and it read mine; and our speechless colloquy was to this effect—

“It was a fairy, and come from Elf-land, it said; and its errand was to make me happy: I must go with it out of the common world to a lonely place—such as the moon, for instance—and it nodded its head towards her horn, rising over Hay-hill: it told me of the alabaster cave and silver vale where we might live.
Now, Jane, trip on before us away to the backstairs; unbolt the side-passage door, and tell the driver of the post-chaise you will see in the yard—or just outside, for I told him not to drive his rattling wheels over the pavement—to be ready; we are coming: and, Jane, if any one is about, come to the foot of the stairs and hem.”

It was by this time half-past five, and the sun was on the point of rising; but I found the kitchen still dark and silent.
That bitter hour cannot be described: in truth, “the waters came into my soul; I sank in deep mire: I felt no standing; I came into deep waters; the floods overflowed me.”

CHAPTER XXVII
Some time in the afternoon I raised my head, and looking round and seeing the western sun gilding the sign of its decline on the wall, I asked, “What am I to do?”

But the answer my mind gave—“Leave Thornfield at once”—was so prompt, so dread, that I stopped my ears.
If you won’t let me live with you, I can build a house of my own close up to your door, and you may come and sit in my parlour when you want company of an evening.”

“But as you are rich, Jane, you have now, no doubt, friends who will look after you, and not suffer you to devote yourself to a blind lameter like me?”

“I told you I am independent, sir, as well as rich: I am my own mistress.”

“And you will stay with me?”

“Certainly—unless you object.
I began to doubt whether he were a servant or not: his dress and speech were both rude, entirely devoid of the superiority observable in Mr. and Mrs. Heathcliff; his thick brown curls were rough and uncultivated, his whiskers encroached bearishly over his cheeks, and his hands were embrowned like those of a common labourer: still his bearing was free, almost haughty, and he showed none of a domestic’s assiduity in attending on the lady of the house.
CHAPTER XI
A new chapter in a novel is something like a new scene in a play; and when I draw up the curtain this time, reader, you must fancy you see a room in the George Inn at Millcote, with such large figured papering on the walls as inn rooms have; such a carpet, such furniture, such ornaments on the mantelpiece, such prints, including a portrait of George the Third, and another of the Prince of Wales, and a representation of the death of Wolfe.
Sometimes I think I am in Northumberland, and that the noises I hear round me are the bubbling of a little brook which runs through Deepden, near our house;—then, when it comes to my turn to reply, I have to be awakened; and having heard nothing of what was read for listening to the visionary brook, I have no answer ready.”

“Yet how well you replied this afternoon.”

“It was mere chance; the subject on which we had been reading had interested me.
“I require and charge you both (as ye will answer at the dreadful day of judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed), that if either of you know any impediment why ye may not lawfully be joined together in matrimony, ye do now confess it; for be ye well assured that so many as are coupled together otherwise than God’s Word doth allow, are not joined together by God, neither is their matrimony lawful.”

He paused, as the custom is.
I have alluded to him, Reader, because I think I see in him an intellect profounder and more unique than his contemporaries have yet recognised; because I regard him as the first social regenerator of the day—as the very master of that working corps who would restore to rectitude the warped system of things; because I think no commentator on his writings has yet found the comparison that suits him, the terms which rightly characterise his talent.
“Why,” thought I, “does she not explain that she could neither clean her nails nor wash her face, as the water was frozen?”

My attention was now called off by Miss Smith desiring me to hold a skein of thread: while she was winding it, she talked to me from time to time, asking whether I had ever been at school before, whether I could mark, stitch, knit, &c.; till she dismissed me, I could not pursue my observations on Miss Scatcherd’s movements.
She was never cross with us; was she, Louisa?”

“No, never: we might do what we pleased; ransack her desk and her workbox, and turn her drawers inside out; and she was so good-natured, she would give us anything we asked for.”

“I suppose, now,” said Miss Ingram, curling her lip sarcastically, “we shall have an abstract of the memoirs of all the governesses extant: in order to avert such a visitation, I again move the introduction of a new topic.
“I am feverish: I hear the wind blowing: I will go out of doors and feel it.”

It was not only the hurry of preparation that made me feverish; not only the anticipation of the great change—the new life which was to commence to-morrow: both these circumstances had their share, doubtless, in producing that restless, excited mood which hurried me forth at this late hour into the darkening grounds: but a third cause influenced my mind more than they.
A Christmas frost had come at midsummer; a white December storm had whirled over June; ice glazed the ripe apples, drifts crushed the blowing roses; on hayfield and cornfield lay a frozen shroud: lanes which last night blushed full of flowers, to-day were pathless with untrodden snow; and the woods, which twelve hours since waved leafy and fragrant as groves between the tropics, now spread, waste, wild, and white as pine-forests in wintry Norway.
John is an accomplished and profound scholar.”

“His manners, I think, you said are not to your taste?—priggish and parsonic?”

“I never mentioned his manners; but, unless I had a very bad taste, they must suit it; they are polished, calm, and gentlemanlike.”

“His appearance,—I forget what description you gave of his appearance;—a sort of raw curate, half strangled with his white neckcloth, and stilted up on his thick-soled high-lows, eh?”

“St.
I gave due inward applause to every object, and then I remembered how old Earnshaw used to come in when all was tidied, and call me a cant lass, and slip a shilling into my hand as a Christmas-box; and from that I went on to think of his fondness for Heathcliff, and his dread lest he should suffer neglect after death had removed him: and that naturally led me to consider the poor lad’s situation now, and from singing I changed my mind to crying.
Theodore, do you remember those merry days?”

“Yaas, to be sure I do,” drawled Lord Ingram; “and the poor old stick used to cry out ‘Oh you villains childs!’—and then we sermonised her on the presumption of attempting to teach such clever blades as we were, when she was herself so ignorant.”

“We did; and, Tedo, you know, I helped you in prosecuting (or persecuting) your tutor, whey-faced Mr. Vining—the parson in the pip, as we used to call him.
“Let us rest here,” said St. John, as we reached the first stragglers of a battalion of rocks, guarding a sort of pass, beyond which the beck rushed down a waterfall; and where, still a little farther, the mountain shook off turf and flower, had only heath for raiment and crag for gem—where it exaggerated the wild to the savage, and exchanged the fresh for the frowning—where it guarded the forlorn hope of solitude, and a last refuge for silence.
I will write to Madeira the moment I get home, and tell my uncle John I am going to be married, and to whom: if I had but a prospect of one day bringing Mr. Rochester an accession of fortune, I could better endure to be kept by him now.” And somewhat relieved by this idea (which I failed not to execute that day), I ventured once more to meet my master’s and lover’s eye, which most pertinaciously sought mine, though I averted both face and gaze.
When Hareton was there, she generally paused in an interesting part, and left the book lying about: that she did repeatedly; but he was as obstinate as a mule, and, instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather he took to smoking with Joseph; and they sat like automatons, one on each side of the fire, the elder happily too deaf to understand her wicked nonsense, as he would have called it, the younger doing his best to seem to disregard it.
One afternoon (I had then been three weeks at Lowood), as I was sitting with a slate in my hand, puzzling over a sum in long division, my eyes, raised in abstraction to the window, caught sight of a figure just passing: I recognised almost instinctively that gaunt outline; and when, two minutes after, all the school, teachers included, rose en masse, it was not necessary for me to look up in order to ascertain whose entrance they thus greeted.
Should any little accidental disappointment of the appetite occur, such as the spoiling of a meal, the under or the over dressing of a dish, the incident ought not to be neutralised by replacing with something more delicate the comfort lost, thus pampering the body and obviating the aim of this institution; it ought to be improved to the spiritual edification of the pupils, by encouraging them to evince fortitude under the temporary privation.
You’ll like Ireland, I think: they’re such warm-hearted people there, they say.”

“It is a long way off, sir.”

“No matter—a girl of your sense will not object to the voyage or the distance.”

“Not the voyage, but the distance: and then the sea is a barrier—”

“From what, Jane?”

“From England and from Thornfield: and—”

“Well?”

“From you, sir.”

I said this almost involuntarily, and, with as little sanction of free will, my tears gushed out.
mixed with the air I breathed; and besides, I remembered I had once been her husband—that recollection was then, and is now, inexpressibly odious to me; moreover, I knew that while she lived I could never be the husband of another and better wife; and, though five years my senior (her family and her father had lied to me even in the particular of her age), she was likely to live as long as I, being as robust in frame as she was infirm in mind.
But, till then—if you don’t believe me, you don’t know me—till then, I would have died by inches before I touched a single hair of his head!”

“And yet,” I interrupted, “you have no scruples in completely ruining all hopes of her perfect restoration, by thrusting yourself into her remembrance now, when she has nearly forgotten you, and involving her in a new tumult of discord and distress.”

“You suppose she has nearly forgotten me?” he said.
Her appearance is changed greatly, her character much more so; and the person who is compelled, of necessity, to be her companion, will only sustain his affection hereafter by the remembrance of what she once was, by common humanity, and a sense of duty!”

“That is quite possible,” remarked Heathcliff, forcing himself to seem calm: “quite possible that your master should have nothing but common humanity and a sense of duty to fall back upon.
Well, Hareton’s aspect was the ghost of my immortal love; of my wild endeavours to hold my right; my degradation, my pride, my happiness, and my anguish—

“But it is frenzy to repeat these thoughts to you: only it will let you know why, with a reluctance to be always alone, his society is no benefit; rather an aggravation of the constant torment I suffer: and it partly contributes to render me regardless how he and his cousin go on together.
He is quite broken down, they say.”

“Have you any sort of conveyance?”

“We have a chaise, ma’am, a very handsome chaise.”

“Let it be got ready instantly; and if your post-boy can drive me to Ferndean before dark this day, I’ll pay both you and him twice the hire you usually demand.”

CHAPTER XXXVII
The manor-house of Ferndean was a building of considerable antiquity, moderate size, and no architectural pretensions, deep buried in a wood.
Rochester has a right to enjoy the society of his guests.”

“No question about his right: but have you never observed that, of all the tales told here about matrimony, Mr. Rochester has been favoured with the most lively and the most continuous?”

“The eagerness of a listener quickens the tongue of a narrator.” I said this rather to myself than to the gipsy, whose strange talk, voice, manner, had by this time wrapped me in a kind of dream.
“She had better not wait till then, Jane,” said Mr. Rochester, when I read her letter to him; “if she does, she will be too late, for our honeymoon will shine our life long: its beams will only fade over your grave or mine.”

How St. John received the news, I don’t know: he never answered the letter in which I communicated it: yet six months after he wrote to me, without, however, mentioning Mr. Rochester’s name or alluding to my marriage.
Mr. Heathcliff having overheard the conversation, as well as I, smiled when he saw him go; but immediately afterwards cast a look of singular aversion on the flippant pair, who remained chattering in the door-way: the boy finding animation enough while discussing Hareton’s faults and deficiencies, and relating anecdotes of his goings on; and the girl relishing his pert and spiteful sayings, without considering the ill-nature they evinced.
“Let the child who broke her slate come forward!”

Of my own accord I could not have stirred; I was paralysed: but the two great girls who sat on each side of me, set me on my legs and pushed me towards the dread judge, and then Miss Temple gently assisted me to his very feet, and I caught her whispered counsel—

“Don’t be afraid, Jane, I saw it was an accident; you shall not be punished.”

The kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.
My task was a very hard one; but, as I was absolutely resolved—as my cousins saw at length that my mind was really and immutably fixed on making a just division of the property—as they must in their own hearts have felt the equity of the intention; and must, besides, have been innately conscious that in my place they would have done precisely what I wished to do—they yielded at length so far as to consent to put the affair to arbitration.
She’s an underhand little thing: I never saw a girl of her age with so much cover.”

Bessie answered not; but ere long, addressing me, she said—

“You ought to be aware, Miss, that you are under obligations to Mrs. Reed: she keeps you: if she were to turn you off, you would have to go to the poorhouse.”

I had nothing to say to these words: they were not new to me: my very first recollections of existence included hints of the same kind.
Yes, and deems, and is bound to deem, himself honoured by the lot, and aspires but after the day when the cross of separation from fleshly ties shall be laid on his shoulders, and when the Head of that church-militant of whose humblest members he is one, shall give the word, ‘Rise, follow Me!’”

St. John said these words as he pronounced his sermons, with a quiet, deep voice; with an unflushed cheek, and a coruscating radiance of glance.
But as matters really stood, to watch Miss Ingram’s efforts at fascinating Mr. Rochester, to witness their repeated failure—herself unconscious that they did fail; vainly fancying that each shaft launched hit the mark, and infatuatedly pluming herself on success, when her pride and self-complacency repelled further and further what she wished to allure—to witness this, was to be at once under ceaseless excitation and ruthless restraint.
His is the exaction of the apostle, who speaks but for Christ, when he says—“Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me.” His is the ambition of the high master-spirit, which aims to fill a place in the first rank of those who are redeemed from the earth—who stand without fault before the throne of God, who share the last mighty victories of the Lamb, who are called, and chosen, and faithful.
The poor thing couldn’t bear that; she grew white and red in rapid succession, and, while tears beaded her lashes, bent the strength of her small fingers to loosen the firm clutch of Catherine; and perceiving that as fast as she raised one finger off her arm another closed down, and she could not remove the whole together, she began to make use of her nails; and their sharpness presently ornamented the detainer’s with crescents of red.
There was a carpet—a good one, but the pattern was obliterated by dust; a fireplace hung with cut-paper, dropping to pieces; a handsome oak-bedstead with ample crimson curtains of rather expensive material and modern make; but they had evidently experienced rough usage: the vallances hung in festoons, wrenched from their rings, and the iron rod supporting them was bent in an arc on one side, causing the drapery to trail upon the floor.
The house-maid alone came here on Saturdays, to wipe from the mirrors and the furniture a week’s quiet dust: and Mrs. Reed herself, at far intervals, visited it to review the contents of a certain secret drawer in the wardrobe, where were stored divers parchments, her jewel-casket, and a miniature of her deceased husband; and in those last words lies the secret of the red-room—the spell which kept it so lonely in spite of its grandeur.
The roads were heavy, the night misty; my conductor let his horse walk all the way, and the hour and a half extended, I verily believe, to two hours; at last he turned in his seat and said—

“You’re noan so far fro’ Thornfield now.”

Again I looked out: we were passing a church; I saw its low broad tower against the sky, and its bell was tolling a quarter; I saw a narrow galaxy of lights too, on a hillside, marking a village or hamlet.
In the course of the tale I had mentioned Mr. Lloyd as having come to see me after the fit: for I never forgot the, to me, frightful episode of the red-room: in detailing which, my excitement was sure, in some degree, to break bounds; for nothing could soften in my recollection the spasm of agony which clutched my heart when Mrs. Reed spurned my wild supplication for pardon, and locked me a second time in the dark and haunted chamber.
There was a manservant left to keep the house with me, and we generally made a practice of locking the doors during the hours of service; but on that occasion the weather was so warm and pleasant that I set them wide open, and, to fulfil my engagement, as I knew who would be coming, I told my companion that the mistress wished very much for some oranges, and he must run over to the village and get a few, to be paid for on the morrow.
She had a turn for traffic, and a marked propensity for saving; shown not only in the vending of eggs and chickens, but also in driving hard bargains with the gardener about flower-roots, seeds, and slips of plants; that functionary having orders from Mrs. Reed to buy of his young lady all the products of her parterre she wished to sell: and Eliza would have sold the hair off her head if she could have made a handsome profit thereby.
I gathered my energies and launched them in this blunt sentence—

“I am not deceitful: if I were, I should say I loved you; but I declare I do not love you: I dislike you the worst of anybody in the world except John Reed; and this book about the liar, you may give to your girl, Georgiana, for it is she who tells lies, and not I.”

Mrs. Reed’s hands still lay on her work inactive: her eye of ice continued to dwell freezingly on mine.
I liked the hush, the gloom, the quaintness of these retreats in the day; but I by no means coveted a night’s repose on one of those wide and heavy beds: shut in, some of them, with doors of oak; shaded, others, with wrought old English hangings crusted with thick work, portraying effigies of strange flowers, and stranger birds, and strangest human beings,—all which would have looked strange, indeed, by the pallid gleam of moonlight.
Now, uttered before a stranger, the accusation cut me to the heart; I dimly perceived that she was already obliterating hope from the new phase of existence which she destined me to enter; I felt, though I could not have expressed the feeling, that she was sowing aversion and unkindness along my future path; I saw myself transformed under Mr. Brocklehurst’s eye into an artful, noxious child, and what could I do to remedy the injury?
“Come where there is some freshness, for a few moments,” he said; “that house is a mere dungeon: don’t you feel it so?”

“It seems to me a splendid mansion, sir.”

“The glamour of inexperience is over your eyes,” he answered; “and you see it through a charmed medium: you cannot discern that the gilding is slime and the silk draperies cobwebs; that the marble is sordid slate, and the polished woods mere refuse chips and scaly bark.
In my flight through the kitchen I bid Joseph speed to his master; I knocked over Hareton, who was hanging a litter of puppies from a chair-back in the doorway; and, blessed as a soul escaped from purgatory, I bounded, leaped, and flew down the steep road; then, quitting its windings, shot direct across the moor, rolling over banks, and wading through marshes: precipitating myself, in fact, towards the beacon-light of the Grange.
Bessie had been down into the kitchen, and she brought up with her a tart on a certain brightly painted china plate, whose bird of paradise, nestling in a wreath of convolvuli and rosebuds, had been wont to stir in me a most enthusiastic sense of admiration; and which plate I had often petitioned to be allowed to take in my hand in order to examine it more closely, but had always hitherto been deemed unworthy of such a privilege.
To this end, I had sat well back on the form, and while seeming to be busy with my sum, had held my slate in such a manner as to conceal my face: I might have escaped notice, had not my treacherous slate somehow happened to slip from my hand, and falling with an obtrusive crash, directly drawn every eye upon me; I knew it was all over now, and, as I stooped to pick up the two fragments of slate, I rallied my forces for the worst.
He expressed once, and but once in my hearing, a strong sense of the rugged charm of the hills, and an inborn affection for the dark roof and hoary walls he called his home; but there was more of gloom than pleasure in the tone and words in which the sentiment was manifested; and never did he seem to roam the moors for the sake of their soothing silence—never seek out or dwell upon the thousand peaceful delights they could yield.
“His father died in debt,” he said; “the whole property is mortgaged, and the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow him an opportunity of creating some interest in the creditor’s heart, that he may be inclined to deal leniently towards him.”

When I reached the Heights, I explained that I had come to see everything carried on decently; and Joseph, who appeared in sufficient distress, expressed satisfaction at my presence.
“Well, Helen?” said I, putting my hand into hers: she chafed my fingers gently to warm them, and went on—

“If all the world hated you, and believed you wicked, while your own conscience approved you, and absolved you from guilt, you would not be without friends.”

“No; I know I should think well of myself; but that is not enough: if others don’t love me I would rather die than live—I cannot bear to be solitary and hated, Helen.
“He starved us when he had the sole superintendence of the provision department, before the committee was appointed; and he bored us with long lectures once a week, and with evening readings from books of his own inditing, about sudden deaths and judgments, which made us afraid to go to bed.”

“What age were you when you went to Lowood?”

“About ten.”

“And you stayed there eight years: you are now, then, eighteen?”

I assented.
“Where are you going?”

“To put Adèle to bed: it is past her bedtime.”

“You are afraid of me, because I talk like a Sphynx.”

“Your language is enigmatical, sir: but though I am bewildered, I am certainly not afraid.”

“You are afraid—your self-love dreads a blunder.”

“In that sense I do feel apprehensive—I have no wish to talk nonsense.”

“If you did, it would be in such a grave, quiet manner, I should mistake it for sense.
I thought I heard the servants all talking together a while ago.”

“Only master had been reading in his bed last night; he fell asleep with his candle lit, and the curtains got on fire; but, fortunately, he awoke before the bed-clothes or the wood-work caught, and contrived to quench the flames with the water in the ewer.”

“A strange affair!” I said, in a low voice: then, looking at her fixedly—“Did Mr. Rochester wake nobody?
I blushed at my inconsideration: but, without showing further consciousness of the offence, I hastened to add—“The truth is, sir, I passed the first part of the night in—” Here I stopped afresh—I was about to say “perusing those old volumes,” then it would have revealed my knowledge of their written, as well as their printed, contents; so, correcting myself, I went on—“in spelling over the name scratched on that window-ledge.
Most true is it that “beauty is in the eye of the gazer.” My master’s colourless, olive face, square, massive brow, broad and jetty eyebrows, deep eyes, strong features, firm, grim mouth,—all energy, decision, will,—were not beautiful, according to rule; but they were more than beautiful to me; they were full of an interest, an influence that quite mastered me,—that took my feelings from my own power and fettered them in his.
One morning, being left alone with him a few minutes in the parlour, I ventured to approach the window-recess—which his table, chair, and desk consecrated as a kind of study—and I was going to speak, though not very well knowing in what words to frame my inquiry—for it is at all times difficult to break the ice of reserve glassing over such natures as his—when he saved me the trouble by being the first to commence a dialogue.
“What a realisation of something more romantic than a fairy tale it would have been for Mrs. Linton Heathcliff, had she and I struck up an attachment, as her good nurse desired, and migrated together into the stirring atmosphere of the town!”

CHAPTER XXXII
1802.—This September I was invited to devastate the moors of a friend in the north, and on my journey to his abode, I unexpectedly came within fifteen miles of Gimmerton.
I have seen in his face a far different expression from that which hardens it now while she is so vivaciously accosting him; but then it came of itself: it was not elicited by meretricious arts and calculated manoeuvres; and one had but to accept it—to answer what he asked without pretension, to address him when needful without grimace—and it increased and grew kinder and more genial, and warmed one like a fostering sunbeam.
There were moments when I was bewildered by the terror he inspired, because I had no appeal whatever against either his menaces or his inflictions; the servants did not like to offend their young master by taking my part against him, and Mrs. Reed was blind and deaf on the subject: she never saw him strike or heard him abuse me, though he did both now and then in her very presence, more frequently, however, behind her back.
“And when Miss Temple teaches you, do your thoughts wander then?”

“No, certainly, not often; because Miss Temple has generally something to say which is newer than my own reflections; her language is singularly agreeable to me, and the information she communicates is often just what I wished to gain.”

“Well, then, with Miss Temple you are good?”

“Yes, in a passive way: I make no effort; I follow as inclination guides me.
Eliza and Georgiana, evidently acting according to orders, spoke to me as little as possible: John thrust his tongue in his cheek whenever he saw me, and once attempted chastisement; but as I instantly turned against him, roused by the same sentiment of deep ire and desperate revolt which had stirred my corruption before, he thought it better to desist, and ran from me uttering execrations, and vowing I had burst his nose.
“No, Miss Jane, not exactly: you are genteel enough; you look like a lady, and it is as much as ever I expected of you: you were no beauty as a child.”

I smiled at Bessie’s frank answer: I felt that it was correct, but I confess I was not quite indifferent to its import: at eighteen most people wish to please, and the conviction that they have not an exterior likely to second that desire brings anything but gratification.
I never seemed in his way; he did not take fits of chilling hauteur: when he met me unexpectedly, the encounter seemed welcome; he had always a word and sometimes a smile for me: when summoned by formal invitation to his presence, I was honoured by a cordiality of reception that made me feel I really possessed the power to amuse him, and that these evening conferences were sought as much for his pleasure as for my benefit.
She bounded before me, and returned to my side, and was off again like a young greyhound; and, at first, I found plenty of entertainment in listening to the larks singing far and near, and enjoying the sweet, warm sunshine; and watching her, my pet and my delight, with her golden ringlets flying loose behind, and her bright cheek, as soft and pure in its bloom as a wild rose, and her eyes radiant with cloudless pleasure.
If she be cold, I’ll think it is this north wind that chills me; and if she be motionless, it is sleep.’ I got a spade from the tool-house, and began to delve with all my might—it scraped the coffin; I fell to work with my hands; the wood commenced cracking about the screws; I was on the point of attaining my object, when it seemed that I heard a sigh from some one above, close at the edge of the grave, and bending down.
Isabella and he had had an hour’s interview, during which he tried to elicit from her some sentiment of proper horror for Heathcliff’s advances: but he could make nothing of her evasive replies, and was obliged to close the examination unsatisfactorily; adding, however, a solemn warning, that if she were so insane as to encourage that worthless suitor, it would dissolve all bonds of relationship between herself and him.
They have taken much time, and some thought.”

“I did them in the last two vacations I spent at Lowood, when I had no other occupation.”

“Where did you get your copies?”

“Out of my head.”

“That head I see now on your shoulders?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Has it other furniture of the same kind within?”

“I should think it may have: I should hope—better.”

He spread the pictures before him, and again surveyed them alternately.
It surprised me when I first discovered that such was his intention: I had thought him a man unlikely to be influenced by motives so commonplace in his choice of a wife; but the longer I considered the position, education, &c., of the parties, the less I felt justified in judging and blaming either him or Miss Ingram for acting in conformity to ideas and principles instilled into them, doubtless, from their childhood.
The superintendent of Lowood (for such was this lady) having taken her seat before a pair of globes placed on one of the tables, summoned the first class round her, and commenced giving a lesson on geography; the lower classes were called by the teachers: repetitions in history, grammar, &c., went on for an hour; writing and arithmetic succeeded, and music lessons were given by Miss Temple to some of the elder girls.
If Miss Ingram had been a good and noble woman, endowed with force, fervour, kindness, sense, I should have had one vital struggle with two tigers—jealousy and despair: then, my heart torn out and devoured, I should have admired her—acknowledged her excellence, and been quiet for the rest of my days: and the more absolute her superiority, the deeper would have been my admiration—the more truly tranquil my quiescence.
It was a fever; and it is gone: her pulse is as slow as mine now, and her cheek as cool.”

He told his wife the same story, and she seemed to believe him; but one night, while leaning on his shoulder, in the act of saying she thought she should be able to get up to-morrow, a fit of coughing took her—a very slight one—he raised her in his arms; she put her two hands about his neck, her face changed, and she was dead.
Abstract your mind from the subject at present: you are too prone to covet your neighbour’s goods; remember this neighbour’s goods are mine.”

“If they were mine, they would be none the less that,” said Heathcliff; “but though Isabella Linton may be silly, she is scarcely mad; and, in short, we’ll dismiss the matter, as you advise.”

From their tongues they did dismiss it; and Catherine, probably, from her thoughts.
When we are struck at without a reason, we should strike back again very hard; I am sure we should—so hard as to teach the person who struck us never to do it again.”

“You will change your mind, I hope, when you grow older: as yet you are but a little untaught girl.”

“But I feel this, Helen; I must dislike those who, whatever I do to please them, persist in disliking me; I must resist those who punish me unjustly.
It was a wet and windy afternoon: Georgiana had fallen asleep on the sofa over the perusal of a novel; Eliza was gone to attend a saint’s-day service at the new church—for in matters of religion she was a rigid formalist: no weather ever prevented the punctual discharge of what she considered her devotional duties; fair or foul, she went to church thrice every Sunday, and as often on week-days as there were prayers.
Whereupon I told her not to mind his badinage; and she, on her part, evinced a fund of genuine French scepticism: denominating Mr. Rochester “un vrai menteur,” and assuring him that she made no account whatever of his “contes de fée,” and that “du reste, il n’y avait pas de fées, et quand même il y en avait:” she was sure they would never appear to him, nor ever give him rings, or offer to live with him in the moon.
And being really fully as much inclined to laugh as scold—for I esteemed it all girlish vanity—I at length relented in a measure, and asked,—“If I consent to burn them, will you promise faithfully neither to send nor receive a letter again, nor a book (for I perceive you have sent him books), nor locks of hair, nor rings, nor playthings?”

“We don’t send playthings,” cried Catherine, her pride overcoming her shame.
“Not even if they were kind to you?”

I shook my head: I could not see how poor people had the means of being kind; and then to learn to speak like them, to adopt their manners, to be uneducated, to grow up like one of the poor women I saw sometimes nursing their children or washing their clothes at the cottage doors of the village of Gateshead: no, I was not heroic enough to purchase liberty at the price of caste.
The other members of the household, viz., John and his wife, Leah the housemaid, and Sophie the French nurse, were decent people; but in no respect remarkable; with Sophie I used to talk French, and sometimes I asked her questions about her native country; but she was not of a descriptive or narrative turn, and generally gave such vapid and confused answers as were calculated rather to check than encourage inquiry.
The drawing-room, as I have before observed, was raised two steps above the dining-room, and on the top of the upper step, placed a yard or two back within the room, appeared a large marble basin, which I recognised as an ornament of the conservatory—where it usually stood, surrounded by exotics, and tenanted by gold fish—and whence it must have been transported with some trouble, on account of its size and weight.
But if you look up and smile with that countenance, I shall swear concession before I know to what, and that will make a fool of me.”

“Not at all, sir; I ask only this: don’t send for the jewels, and don’t crown me with roses: you might as well put a border of gold lace round that plain pocket handkerchief you have there.”

“I might as well ‘gild refined gold.’ I know it: your request is granted then—for the time.
I’ll get admitted there, and I’ll stir up mutiny; and you, three-tailed bashaw as you are, sir, shall in a trice find yourself fettered amongst our hands: nor will I, for one, consent to cut your bonds till you have signed a charter, the most liberal that despot ever yet conferred.”

“I would consent to be at your mercy, Jane.”

“I would have no mercy, Mr. Rochester, if you supplicated for it with an eye like that.
Very soon you seemed to get used to me: I believe you felt the existence of sympathy between you and your grim and cross master, Jane; for it was astonishing to see how quickly a certain pleasant ease tranquillised your manner: snarl as I would, you showed no surprise, fear, annoyance, or displeasure at my moroseness; you watched me, and now and then smiled at me with a simple yet sagacious grace I cannot describe.
I was physically influenced by the atmosphere and scene, and my ears were filled with the curses the maniac still shrieked out; wherein she momentarily mingled my name with such a tone of demon-hate, with such language!—no professed harlot ever had a fouler vocabulary than she: though two rooms off, I heard every word—the thin partitions of the West India house opposing but slight obstruction to her wolfish cries.
Traversing the long and matted gallery, I descended the slippery steps of oak; then I gained the hall: I halted there a minute; I looked at some pictures on the walls (one, I remember, represented a grim man in a cuirass, and one a lady with powdered hair and a pearl necklace), at a bronze lamp pendent from the ceiling, at a great clock whose case was of oak curiously carved, and ebon black with time and rubbing.
He continued to send for me punctually the moment the clock struck seven; though when I appeared before him now, he had no such honeyed terms as “love” and “darling” on his lips: the best words at my service were “provoking puppet,” “malicious elf,” “sprite,” “changeling,” &c. For caresses, too, I now got grimaces; for a pressure of the hand, a pinch on the arm; for a kiss on the cheek, a severe tweak of the ear.
I shall devote myself for a time to the examination of the Roman Catholic dogmas, and to a careful study of the workings of their system: if I find it to be, as I half suspect it is, the one best calculated to ensure the doing of all things decently and in order, I shall embrace the tenets of Rome and probably take the veil.”

I neither expressed surprise at this resolution nor attempted to dissuade her from it.
I believe there is quite a party assembled there; Lord Ingram, Sir George Lynn, Colonel Dent, and others.”

“Do you expect him back to-night?”

“No—nor to-morrow either; I should think he is very likely to stay a week or more: when these fine, fashionable people get together, they are so surrounded by elegance and gaiety, so well provided with all that can please and entertain, they are in no hurry to separate.
Don’t start when I chance to speak rather sharply; it’s so provoking.”

“I don’t think I shall ever be afraid of you again, Bessie, because I have got used to you, and I shall soon have another set of people to dread.”

“If you dread them they’ll dislike you.”

“As you do, Bessie?”

“I don’t dislike you, Miss; I believe I am fonder of you than of all the others.”

“You don’t show it.”

“You little sharp thing!
Nothing could be more becoming to your complexion than that ruffian’s rouge.”

“You would like a hero of the road then?”

“An English hero of the road would be the next best thing to an Italian bandit; and that could only be surpassed by a Levantine pirate.”

“Well, whatever I am, remember you are my wife; we were married an hour since, in the presence of all these witnesses.” She giggled, and her colour rose.
I see you can say nothing: in the first place, you are faint still, and have enough to do to draw your breath; in the second place, you cannot yet accustom yourself to accuse and revile me, and besides, the flood-gates of tears are opened, and they would rush out if you spoke much; and you have no desire to expostulate, to upbraid, to make a scene: you are thinking how to act—talking you consider is of no use.
I have it here—it is always more satisfactory to see important points written down, fairly committed to black and white.”

And the pocket-book was again deliberately produced, opened, sought through; from one of its compartments was extracted a shabby slip of paper, hastily torn off: I recognised in its texture and its stains of ultra-marine, and lake, and vermillion, the ravished margin of the portrait-cover.
I knew him from a boy, you see: and for my part, I have often wished that Miss Eyre had been sunk in the sea before she came to Thornfield Hall.”

“Then Mr. Rochester was at home when the fire broke out?”

“Yes, indeed was he; and he went up to the attics when all was burning above and below, and got the servants out of their beds and helped them down himself, and went back to get his mad wife out of her cell.
I will spare you the trouble of much talking; I will answer for you—Because I have a wife already, you would reply.—I guess rightly?”

“Yes.”

“If you think so, you must have a strange opinion of me; you must regard me as a plotting profligate—a base and low rake who has been simulating disinterested love in order to draw you into a snare deliberately laid, and strip you of honour and rob you of self-respect.
She was hasty, but good-humoured; vain (she could not help it, when every glance in the glass showed her such a flush of loveliness), but not affected; liberal-handed; innocent of the pride of wealth; ingenuous; sufficiently intelligent; gay, lively, and unthinking: she was very charming, in short, even to a cool observer of her own sex like me; but she was not profoundly interesting or thoroughly impressive.
At first, being little accustomed to learn by heart, the lessons appeared to me both long and difficult; the frequent change from task to task, too, bewildered me; and I was glad when, about three o’clock in the afternoon, Miss Smith put into my hands a border of muslin two yards long, together with needle, thimble, &c., and sent me to sit in a quiet corner of the schoolroom, with directions to hem the same.
Having sought and obtained an audience of the superintendent during the noontide recreation, I told her I had a prospect of getting a new situation where the salary would be double what I now received (for at Lowood I only got £15 per annum); and requested she would break the matter for me to Mr. Brocklehurst, or some of the committee, and ascertain whether they would permit me to mention them as references.
Moreover, before I definitively resolve on quitting England, I will know for certain whether I cannot be of greater use by remaining in it than by leaving it.”

“What do you mean?”

“It would be fruitless to attempt to explain; but there is a point on which I have long endured painful doubt, and I can go nowhere till by some means that doubt is removed.”

“I know where your heart turns and to what it clings.
Whatever be your notion of Mr. Edgar, you cannot doubt that she has a capacity for strong attachments, or she wouldn’t have abandoned the elegancies, and comforts, and friends of her former home, to fix contentedly, in such a wilderness as this, with you.”

“She abandoned them under a delusion,” he answered; “picturing in me a hero of romance, and expecting unlimited indulgences from my chivalrous devotion.
She had cried out, when I carried up her dinner, that she couldn’t bear any longer being in the cold; and I told her the master was going to Thrushcross Grange, and Earnshaw and I needn’t hinder her from descending; so, as soon as she heard Heathcliff’s horse trot off, she made her appearance, donned in black, and her yellow curls combed back behind her ears as plain as a Quaker: she couldn’t comb them out.
She didn’t thank him; still, he felt gratified that she had accepted his assistance, and ventured to stand behind as she examined them, and even to stoop and point out what struck his fancy in certain old pictures which they contained; nor was he daunted by the saucy style in which she jerked the page from his finger: he contented himself with going a bit farther back and looking at her instead of the book.
We were, as I have said, in the dining-room: the lustre, which had been lit for dinner, filled the room with a festal breadth of light; the large fire was all red and clear; the purple curtains hung rich and ample before the lofty window and loftier arch; everything was still, save the subdued chat of Adèle (she dared not speak loud), and, filling up each pause, the beating of winter rain against the panes.
She was intent on her work, in which her whole thoughts seemed absorbed: on her hard forehead, and in her commonplace features, was nothing either of the paleness or desperation one would have expected to see marking the countenance of a woman who had attempted murder, and whose intended victim had followed her last night to her lair, and (as I believed), charged her with the crime she wished to perpetrate.
You are married to Bessie?”

“Yes, Miss: my wife is very hearty, thank you; she brought me another little one about two months since—we have three now—and both mother and child are thriving.”

“And are the family well at the house, Robert?”

“I am sorry I can’t give you better news of them, Miss: they are very badly at present—in great trouble.”

“I hope no one is dead,” I said, glancing at his black dress.
I do regret, however, that he so little deserves the trouble: if I wished any blessing in the world, it was to find him a worthy object of pride; and I’m bitterly disappointed with the whey-faced, whining wretch!”

While he was speaking, Joseph returned bearing a basin of milk-porridge, and placed it before Linton: who stirred round the homely mess with a look of aversion, and affirmed he could not eat it.
Our clothing was insufficient to protect us from the severe cold: we had no boots, the snow got into our shoes and melted there: our ungloved hands became numbed and covered with chilblains, as were our feet: I remember well the distracting irritation I endured from this cause every evening, when my feet inflamed; and the torture of thrusting the swelled, raw, and stiff toes into my shoes in the morning.
Mr. Eshton, the magistrate of the district, is gentleman-like: his hair is quite white, his eyebrows and whiskers still dark, which gives him something of the appearance of a “père noble de théâtre.” Lord Ingram, like his sisters, is very tall; like them, also, he is handsome; but he shares Mary’s apathetic and listless look: he seems to have more length of limb than vivacity of blood or vigour of brain.
“I should not allow any one to inconvenience me, if I could hinder it—walk in!”

The “walk in” was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed the sentiment, “Go to the Deuce!” even the gate over which he leant manifested no sympathising movement to the words; and I think that circumstance determined me to accept the invitation: I felt interested in a man who seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself.
Then, the paleness of her face—its haggard aspect having vanished as she recovered flesh—and the peculiar expression arising from her mental state, though painfully suggestive of their causes, added to the touching interest which she awakened; and—invariably to me, I know, and to any person who saw her, I should think—refuted more tangible proofs of convalescence, and stamped her as one doomed to decay.
Grief, and that together, transformed him into a complete hermit: he threw up his office of magistrate, ceased even to attend church, avoided the village on all occasions, and spent a life of entire seclusion within the limits of his park and grounds; only varied by solitary rambles on the moors, and visits to the grave of his wife, mostly at evening, or early morning before other wanderers were abroad.
Such being the case, I felt not a little surprised when he raised his head suddenly from the desk over which he was stooping, and said—

“You see, Jane, the battle is fought and the victory won.”

Startled at being thus addressed, I did not immediately reply: after a moment’s hesitation I answered—

“But are you sure you are not in the position of those conquerors whose triumphs have cost them too dear?
Tell me, sincerely, what you think of him: is he changed for the better, or is there a prospect of improvement, as he grows a man?’

“‘He’s very delicate, sir,’ I replied; ‘and scarcely likely to reach manhood: but this I can say, he does not resemble his father; and if Miss Catherine had the misfortune to marry him, he would not be beyond her control: unless she were extremely and foolishly indulgent.
“That proves you have a wicked heart; and you must pray to God to change it: to give you a new and clean one: to take away your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh.”

I was about to propound a question, touching the manner in which that operation of changing my heart was to be performed, when Mrs. Reed interposed, telling me to sit down; she then proceeded to carry on the conversation herself.
A rude noise broke on these fine ripplings and whisperings, at once so far away and so clear: a positive tramp, tramp, a metallic clatter, which effaced the soft wave-wanderings; as, in a picture, the solid mass of a crag, or the rough boles of a great oak, drawn in dark and strong on the foreground, efface the aërial distance of azure hill, sunny horizon, and blended clouds where tint melts into tint.
In passing the door of that sanctum some time after, I caught the words—

“She’ll happen do better for him nor ony o’ t’ grand ladies.” And again, “If she ben’t one o’ th’ handsomest, she’s noan faâl and varry good-natured; and i’ his een she’s fair beautiful, onybody may see that.”

I wrote to Moor House and to Cambridge immediately, to say what I had done: fully explaining also why I had thus acted.
and wheedle my father out of all he has: only afterwards show him what you are, imp of Satan.—And take that, I hope he’ll kick out your brains!”

Heathcliff had gone to loose the beast, and shift it to his own stall; he was passing behind it, when Hindley finished his speech by knocking him under its feet, and without stopping to examine whether his hopes were fulfilled, ran away as fast as he could.
put the key in the lock, and draw the bolts.’

“Earnshaw accomplished this ere his guest reached the front; he then came and brought his chair to the other side of my table, leaning over it, and searching in my eyes for a sympathy with the burning hate that gleamed from his: as he both looked and felt like an assassin, he couldn’t exactly find that; but he discovered enough to encourage him to speak.
All this is visible to you by the light of an oil lamp hanging from the ceiling, and by that of an excellent fire, near which I sit in my cloak and bonnet; my muff and umbrella lie on the table, and I am warming away the numbness and chill contracted by sixteen hours’ exposure to the rawness of an October day: I left Lowton at four o’clock A.M., and the Millcote town clock is now just striking eight.
Again Mr. Rochester propounded his query:

“Is the wandering and sinful, but now rest-seeking and repentant, man justified in daring the world’s opinion, in order to attach to him for ever this gentle, gracious, genial stranger, thereby securing his own peace of mind and regeneration of life?”

“Sir,” I answered, “a wanderer’s repose or a sinner’s reformation should never depend on a fellow-creature.
As his curate, his comrade, all would be right: I would cross oceans with him in that capacity; toil under Eastern suns, in Asian deserts with him in that office; admire and emulate his courage and devotion and vigour; accommodate quietly to his masterhood; smile undisturbed at his ineradicable ambition; discriminate the Christian from the man: profoundly esteem the one, and freely forgive the other.
My uncle is dead, and he left me to her care.”

“Did she not, then, adopt you of her own accord?”

“No, ma’am; she was sorry to have to do it: but my uncle, as I have often heard the servants say, got her to promise before he died that she would always keep me.”

“Well now, Jane, you know, or at least I will tell you, that when a criminal is accused, he is always allowed to speak in his own defence.
I have scarcely interchanged a syllable with one of them; and as to thinking well of them, I consider some respectable, and stately, and middle-aged, and others young, dashing, handsome, and lively: but certainly they are all at liberty to be the recipients of whose smiles they please, without my feeling disposed to consider the transaction of any moment to me.”

“You don’t know the gentlemen here?
I rely implicitly on His power, and confide wholly in His goodness: I count the hours till that eventful one arrives which shall restore me to Him, reveal Him to me.”

“You are sure, then, Helen, that there is such a place as heaven, and that our souls can get to it when we die?”

“I am sure there is a future state; I believe God is good; I can resign my immortal part to Him without any misgiving.
I thought I prevented another explosion by my compliance; and I thought, too, it might create a favourable crisis in Catherine’s mental illness: and then I remembered Mr. Edgar’s stern rebuke of my carrying tales; and I tried to smooth away all disquietude on the subject, by affirming, with frequent iteration, that that betrayal of trust, if it merited so harsh an appellation, should be the last.
This achieved, she jumped from my knee and said, “Now, Mademoiselle, I will repeat you some poetry.”

Assuming an attitude, she began, “La Ligue des Rats: fable de La Fontaine.” She then declaimed the little piece with an attention to punctuation and emphasis, a flexibility of voice and an appropriateness of gesture, very unusual indeed at her age, and which proved she had been carefully trained.
This is legitimate, et j’y tiens, as Adèle would say; and it is by virtue of this superiority, and this alone, that I desire you to have the goodness to talk to me a little now, and divert my thoughts, which are galled with dwelling on one point—cankering as a rusty nail.”

He had deigned an explanation, almost an apology, and I did not feel insensible to his condescension, and would not seem so.
‘They will come to her boudoir, no doubt,’ thought I: ‘let me prepare an ambush.’ So putting my hand in through the open window, I drew the curtain over it, leaving only an opening through which I could take observations; then I closed the casement, all but a chink just wide enough to furnish an outlet to lovers’ whispered vows: then I stole back to my chair; and as I resumed it the pair came in.
I gazed long at the weather-worn block; and, stooping down, perceived a hole near the bottom still full of snail-shells and pebbles, which we were fond of storing there with more perishable things; and, as fresh as reality, it appeared that I beheld my early playmate seated on the withered turf: his dark, square head bent forward, and his little hand scooping out the earth with a piece of slate.
Now, I have the satisfaction of being sure that he detests me, to the point of its annoying him seriously to have me within ear-shot or eyesight: I notice, when I enter his presence, the muscles of his countenance are involuntarily distorted into an expression of hatred; partly arising from his knowledge of the good causes I have to feel that sentiment for him, and partly from original aversion.
Yet I was glad at first—she deserved punishing for pushing me: but when papa was gone, she made me come to the window and showed me her cheek cut on the inside, against her teeth, and her mouth filling with blood; and then she gathered up the bits of the picture, and went and sat down with her face to the wall, and she has never spoken to me since: and I sometimes think she can’t speak for pain.
I can remember Miss Temple walking lightly and rapidly along our drooping line, her plaid cloak, which the frosty wind fluttered, gathered close about her, and encouraging us, by precept and example, to keep up our spirits, and march forward, as she said, “like stalwart soldiers.” The other teachers, poor things, were generally themselves too much dejected to attempt the task of cheering others.
A sort of instinct seemed to warn him of her entrance, even when he did not see it; and when he was looking quite away from the door, if she appeared at it, his cheek would glow, and his marble-seeming features, though they refused to relax, changed indescribably, and in their very quiescence became expressive of a repressed fervour, stronger than working muscle or darting glance could indicate.
Besides, with this creed, I can so clearly distinguish between the criminal and his crime; I can so sincerely forgive the first while I abhor the last: with this creed revenge never worries my heart, degradation never too deeply disgusts me, injustice never crushes me too low: I live in calm, looking to the end.”

Helen’s head, always drooping, sank a little lower as she finished this sentence.
I never saw a more splendid scene: the ladies were magnificently dressed; most of them—at least most of the younger ones—looked handsome; but Miss Ingram was certainly the queen.”

“And what was she like?”

“Tall, fine bust, sloping shoulders; long, graceful neck: olive complexion, dark and clear; noble features; eyes rather like Mr. Rochester’s: large and black, and as brilliant as her jewels.
I consider that when a dependent does her duty as well as you have done yours, she has a sort of claim upon her employer for any little assistance he can conveniently render her; indeed I have already, through my future mother-in-law, heard of a place that I think will suit: it is to undertake the education of the five daughters of Mrs. Dionysius O’Gall of Bitternutt Lodge, Connaught, Ireland.
I’ course, he tells Dame Catherine how her fathur’s goold runs into his pocket, and her fathur’s son gallops down t’ broad road, while he flees afore to oppen t’ pikes!’ Now, Miss Linton, Joseph is an old rascal, but no liar; and, if his account of Heathcliff’s conduct be true, you would never think of desiring such a husband, would you?”

“You are leagued with the rest, Ellen!” she replied.
Blanche Ingram, after having repelled, by supercilious taciturnity, some efforts of Mrs. Dent and Mrs. Eshton to draw her into conversation, had first murmured over some sentimental tunes and airs on the piano, and then, having fetched a novel from the library, had flung herself in haughty listlessness on a sofa, and prepared to beguile, by the spell of fiction, the tedious hours of absence.
She refused; and I unwillingly donned a cloak, and took my umbrella to accompany her on a stroll to the bottom of the park: a formal walk which she generally affected if low-spirited—and that she invariably was when Mr. Edgar had been worse than ordinary, a thing never known from his confession, but guessed both by her and me from his increased silence and the melancholy of his countenance.
Thus relieved of a grievous load, I from that hour set to work afresh, resolved to pioneer my way through every difficulty: I toiled hard, and my success was proportionate to my efforts; my memory, not naturally tenacious, improved with practice; exercise sharpened my wits; in a few weeks I was promoted to a higher class; in less than two months I was allowed to commence French and drawing.
You must go into the drawing-room while it is empty, before the ladies leave the dinner-table; choose your seat in any quiet nook you like; you need not stay long after the gentlemen come in, unless you please: just let Mr. Rochester see you are there and then slip away—nobody will notice you.”

“Will these people remain long, do you think?”

“Perhaps two or three weeks, certainly not more.
Instead of subsiding as night drew on, it seemed to augment its rush and deepen its roar: the trees blew steadfastly one way, never writhing round, and scarcely tossing back their boughs once in an hour; so continuous was the strain bending their branchy heads northward—the clouds drifted from pole to pole, fast following, mass on mass: no glimpse of blue sky had been visible that July day.
It includes kitchen and parlour, generally; but I believe at Wuthering Heights the kitchen is forced to retreat altogether into another quarter: at least I distinguished a chatter of tongues, and a clatter of culinary utensils, deep within; and I observed no signs of roasting, boiling, or baking, about the huge fireplace; nor any glitter of copper saucepans and tin cullenders on the walls.
The sun set behind the Grange as we turned on to the moors; by that, I judged it to be six o’clock; and my companion halted half an hour, to inspect the park, and the gardens, and, probably, the place itself, as well as he could; so it was dark when we dismounted in the paved yard of the farm-house, and your old fellow-servant, Joseph, issued out to receive us by the light of a dip candle.
Are you willing to endure to the last, and not once attempt a repayment?’

“‘I’m weary of enduring now,’ I replied; ‘and I’d be glad of a retaliation that wouldn’t recoil on myself; but treachery and violence are spears pointed at both ends; they wound those who resort to them worse than their enemies.’

“‘Treachery and violence are a just return for treachery and violence!’ cried Hindley.
I had just taken the children upstairs, after tea was finished, and seen Linton asleep—he would not suffer me to leave him till that was the case—I had come down, and was standing by the table in the hall, lighting a bedroom candle for Mr. Edgar, when a maid stepped out of the kitchen and informed me that Mr. Heathcliff’s servant Joseph was at the door, and wished to speak with the master.
The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty: as it waned into dusk, I began to feel that we were getting very far indeed from Gateshead: we ceased to pass through towns; the country changed; great grey hills heaved up round the horizon: as twilight deepened, we descended a valley, dark with wood, and long after night had overclouded the prospect, I heard a wild wind rushing amongst trees.
My companion expressed no surprise at this emotion, nor did he question me as to its cause; he only said—

“We will wait a few minutes, Jane, till you are more composed.” And while I smothered the paroxysm with all haste, he sat calm and patient, leaning on his desk, and looking like a physician watching with the eye of science an expected and fully understood crisis in a patient’s malady.
Ellen, help Miss Catherine off with her things—Stay, dear, you will disarrange your curls—let me untie your hat.”

I removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath a grand plaid silk frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes; and, while her eyes sparkled joyfully when the dogs came bounding up to welcome her, she dared hardly touch them lest they should fawn upon her splendid garments.
Consistency, my dear Mr. Brocklehurst; I advocate consistency in all things.”

“Consistency, madam, is the first of Christian duties; and it has been observed in every arrangement connected with the establishment of Lowood: plain fare, simple attire, unsophisticated accommodations, hardy and active habits; such is the order of the day in the house and its inhabitants.”

“Quite right, sir.
Well, our ship stopped in the morning, before it was quite daylight, at a great city—a huge city, with very dark houses and all smoky; not at all like the pretty clean town I came from; and Mr. Rochester carried me in his arms over a plank to the land, and Sophie came after, and we all got into a coach, which took us to a beautiful large house, larger than this and finer, called an hotel.
Mr. Heathcliff, be kind enough to bid this friend of yours release me: she forgets that you and I are not intimate acquaintances; and what amuses her is painful to me beyond expression.”

As the guest answered nothing, but took his seat, and looked thoroughly indifferent what sentiments she cherished concerning him, she turned and whispered an earnest appeal for liberty to her tormentor.
The frock was of light silk, and clung to her with wet, and her feet were protected merely by thin slippers; add to this a deep cut under one ear, which only the cold prevented from bleeding profusely, a white face scratched and bruised, and a frame hardly able to support itself through fatigue; and you may fancy my first fright was not much allayed when I had had leisure to examine her.
I sobbed and wept so that my eyes were almost blind; and the ruffian you have such sympathy with stood opposite: presuming every now and then to bid me ‘wisht,’ and denying that it was his fault; and, finally, frightened by my assertions that I would tell papa, and that he should be put in prison and hanged, he commenced blubbering himself, and hurried out to hide his cowardly agitation.
I would have asked why Mrs. Dean had deserted the Grange, but it was impossible to delay her at such a crisis, so I turned away and made my exit, rambling leisurely along, with the glow of a sinking sun behind, and the mild glory of a rising moon in front—one fading, and the other brightening—as I quitted the park, and climbed the stony by-road branching off to Mr. Heathcliff’s dwelling.
I’m sure last winter (it was a very severe one, if you recollect, and when it did not snow, it rained and blew), not a creature but the butcher and postman came to the house, from November till February; and I really got quite melancholy with sitting night after night alone; I had Leah in to read to me sometimes; but I don’t think the poor girl liked the task much: she felt it confining.
I’ve had the room next to mine prepared for you; it is only a small apartment, but I thought you would like it better than one of the large front chambers: to be sure they have finer furniture, but they are so dreary and solitary, I never sleep in them myself.”

I thanked her for her considerate choice, and as I really felt fatigued with my long journey, expressed my readiness to retire.
I thought, sir, that you were on the road a long way before me; and I strained every nerve to overtake you, and made effort on effort to utter your name and entreat you to stop—but my movements were fettered, and my voice still died away inarticulate; while you, I felt, withdrew farther and farther every moment.”

“And these dreams weigh on your spirits now, Jane, when I am close to you?
I again demand, what have you to say?”

“Sir—sir,” interrupted the clergyman, “do not forget you are in a sacred place.” Then addressing Mason, he inquired gently, “Are you aware, sir, whether or not this gentleman’s wife is still living?”

“Courage,” urged the lawyer,—“speak out.”

“She is now living at Thornfield Hall,” said Mason, in more articulate tones: “I saw her there last April.
Meantime, you forget essential points in pursuing trifles: you do not inquire why Mr. Briggs sought after you—what he wanted with you.”

“Well, what did he want?”

“Merely to tell you that your uncle, Mr. Eyre of Madeira, is dead; that he has left you all his property, and that you are now rich—merely that—nothing more.”

“I!—rich?”

“Yes, you, rich—quite an heiress.”

Silence succeeded.
She kept wandering to and fro, from the gate to the door, in a state of agitation which permitted no repose; and at length took up a permanent situation on one side of the wall, near the road: where, heedless of my expostulations and the growling thunder, and the great drops that began to plash around her, she remained, calling at intervals, and then listening, and then crying outright.
That seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to be hoped for; and yet I did hope, and began to cheer up under the prospect of retaining my home and my employment, and, above all, my beloved young mistress; when a servant—one of the discarded ones, not yet departed—rushed hastily in, and said “that devil Heathcliff” was coming through the court: should he fasten the door in his face?
“She’s not accustomed to be spoiled—not kept for a pet.” Then, striding to a side door, he shouted again, “Joseph!”

Joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar, but gave no intimation of ascending; so his master dived down to him, leaving me vis-à-vis the ruffianly bitch and a pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs, who shared with her a jealous guardianship over all my movements.
The Press and the Public are but vague personifications for me, and I must thank them in vague terms; but my Publishers are definite: so are certain generous critics who have encouraged me as only large-hearted and high-minded men know how to encourage a struggling stranger; to them, i.e., to my Publishers and the select Reviewers, I say cordially, Gentlemen, I thank you from my heart.
If he were insane, however, his was a very cool and collected insanity: I had never seen that handsome-featured face of his look more like chiselled marble than it did just now, as he put aside his snow-wet hair from his forehead and let the firelight shine free on his pale brow and cheek as pale, where it grieved me to discover the hollow trace of care or sorrow now so plainly graved.
You say papa will get better, and why shouldn’t he?”

“Well, well,” I cried, “after all, we needn’t trouble ourselves; for listen, Miss,—and mind, I’ll keep my word,—if you attempt going to Wuthering Heights again, with or without me, I shall inform Mr. Linton, and, unless he allow it, the intimacy with your cousin must not be revived.”

“It has been revived,” muttered Cathy, sulkily.
“What should I see besides Aunt Reed in the apartment?—a man or a woman?” The handle turned, the door unclosed, and passing through and curtseying low, I looked up at—a black pillar!—such, at least, appeared to me, at first sight, the straight, narrow, sable-clad shape standing erect on the rug: the grim face at the top was like a carved mask, placed above the shaft by way of capital.
Adèle now petitioned to go down; but I took her on my knee, and gave her to understand that she must not on any account think of venturing in sight of the ladies, either now or at any other time, unless expressly sent for: that Mr. Rochester would be very angry, &c. “Some natural tears she shed” on being told this; but as I began to look very grave, she consented at last to wipe them.
How can we be for ever together—sometimes in solitudes, sometimes amidst savage tribes—and unwed?”

“Very well,” I said shortly; “under the circumstances, quite as well as if I were either your real sister, or a man and a clergyman like yourself.”

“It is known that you are not my sister; I cannot introduce you as such: to attempt it would be to fasten injurious suspicions on us both.
A ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing, devouring, would have been a meet emblem of my mind when I accused and menaced Mrs. Reed: the same ridge, black and blasted after the flames are dead, would have represented as meetly my subsequent condition, when half-an-hour’s silence and reflection had shown me the madness of my conduct, and the dreariness of my hated and hating position.
Strongly-marked horizontal eyebrows must be traced under that brow; then followed, naturally, a well-defined nose, with a straight ridge and full nostrils; then a flexible-looking mouth, by no means narrow; then a firm chin, with a decided cleft down the middle of it: of course, some black whiskers were wanted, and some jetty hair, tufted on the temples, and waved above the forehead.
I remember the master, before he fell into a doze, stroking her bonny hair—it pleased him rarely to see her gentle—and saying, “Why canst thou not always be a good lass, Cathy?” And she turned her face up to his, and laughed, and answered, “Why cannot you always be a good man, father?” But as soon as she saw him vexed again, she kissed his hand, and said she would sing him to sleep.
Linton is now just recovering,” I said; “she’ll never be like she was, but her life is spared; and if you really have a regard for her, you’ll shun crossing her way again: nay, you’ll move out of this country entirely; and that you may not regret it, I’ll inform you Catherine Linton is as different now from your old friend Catherine Earnshaw, as that young lady is different from me.
I meant to explain this some time as you grew older, and I’m sorry I delayed it.”

“But Mr. Heathcliff was quite cordial, papa,” observed Catherine, not at all convinced; “and he didn’t object to our seeing each other: he said I might come to his house when I pleased; only I must not tell you, because you had quarrelled with him, and would not forgive him for marrying aunt Isabella.
She was not allowed much time for meditation: a monitor, a great rough girl, presently came up, exclaiming in a strong Cumberland accent—

“Helen Burns, if you don’t go and put your drawer in order, and fold up your work this minute, I’ll tell Miss Scatcherd to come and look at it!”

Helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed the monitor without reply as without delay.
“Little friend,” said he, in quite a changed tone—while his face changed too, losing all its softness and gravity, and becoming harsh and sarcastic—“you have noticed my tender penchant for Miss Ingram: don’t you think if I married her she would regenerate me with a vengeance?”

He got up instantly, went quite to the other end of the walk, and when he came back he was humming a tune.
On the before-named occasion he came into the house to announce his intention of doing nothing, while I was assisting Miss Cathy to arrange her dress: she had not reckoned on his taking it into his head to be idle; and imagining she would have the whole place to herself, she managed, by some means, to inform Mr. Edgar of her brother’s absence, and was then preparing to receive him.
I informed Mr. Heathcliff, and he replied,—‘Well, let her be till after the funeral; and go up now and then to get her what is needful; and, as soon as she seems better, tell me.’”

Cathy stayed upstairs a fortnight, according to Zillah; who visited her twice a day, and would have been rather more friendly, but her attempts at increasing kindness were proudly and promptly repelled.
The present Mr. Rochester’s mother was a Fairfax, and second cousin to my husband: but I never presume on the connection—in fact, it is nothing to me; I consider myself quite in the light of an ordinary housekeeper: my employer is always civil, and I expect nothing more.”

“And the little girl—my pupil!”

“She is Mr. Rochester’s ward; he commissioned me to find a governess for her.
Jewels for Jane Eyre sounds unnatural and strange: I would rather not have them.”

“I will myself put the diamond chain round your neck, and the circlet on your forehead,—which it will become: for nature, at least, has stamped her patent of nobility on this brow, Jane; and I will clasp the bracelets on these fine wrists, and load these fairy-like fingers with rings.”

“No, no, sir!
When he had done, instead of feeling better, calmer, more enlightened by his discourse, I experienced an inexpressible sadness; for it seemed to me—I know not whether equally so to others—that the eloquence to which I had been listening had sprung from a depth where lay turbid dregs of disappointment—where moved troubling impulses of insatiate yearnings and disquieting aspirations.
He had not kept his promise of treating me like his sisters; he continually made little chilling differences between us, which did not at all tend to the development of cordiality: in short, now that I was acknowledged his kinswoman, and lived under the same roof with him, I felt the distance between us to be far greater than when he had known me only as the village schoolmistress.
My seat, to which Bessie and the bitter Miss Abbot had left me riveted, was a low ottoman near the marble chimney-piece; the bed rose before me; to my right hand there was the high, dark wardrobe, with subdued, broken reflections varying the gloss of its panels; to my left were the muffled windows; a great looking-glass between them repeated the vacant majesty of the bed and room.
Mr. Brocklehurst, who, from his wealth and family connections, could not be overlooked, still retained the post of treasurer; but he was aided in the discharge of his duties by gentlemen of rather more enlarged and sympathising minds: his office of inspector, too, was shared by those who knew how to combine reason with strictness, comfort with economy, compassion with uprightness.
The couple were thus revealed to me clearly: both removed their cloaks, and there was ‘the Varens,’ shining in satin and jewels,—my gifts of course,—and there was her companion in an officer’s uniform; and I knew him for a young roué of a vicomte—a brainless and vicious youth whom I had sometimes met in society, and had never thought of hating because I despised him so absolutely.
Signior Eduardo, are you in voice to-night?”

“Donna Bianca, if you command it, I will be.”

“Then, signior, I lay on you my sovereign behest to furbish up your lungs and other vocal organs, as they will be wanted on my royal service.”

“Who would not be the Rizzio of so divine a Mary?”

“A fig for Rizzio!” cried she, tossing her head with all its curls, as she moved to the piano.
“I believe you will accept the post I offer you,” said he, “and hold it for a while: not permanently, though: any more than I could permanently keep the narrow and narrowing—the tranquil, hidden office of English country incumbent; for in your nature is an alloy as detrimental to repose as that in mine, though of a different kind.”

“Do explain,” I urged, when he halted once more.
Were I in your place, I would frame high notions of my birth; and the thoughts of what I was should give me courage and dignity to support the oppressions of a little farmer!”

So I chattered on; and Heathcliff gradually lost his frown and began to look quite pleasant, when all at once our conversation was interrupted by a rumbling sound moving up the road and entering the court.
Miss Eyre, draw your chair still a little farther forward: you are yet too far back; I cannot see you without disturbing my position in this comfortable chair, which I have no mind to do.”

I did as I was bid, though I would much rather have remained somewhat in the shade; but Mr. Rochester had such a direct way of giving orders, it seemed a matter of course to obey him promptly.
I meant to tell my tale plainly, and make my proposals openly: and it appeared to me so absolutely rational that I should be considered free to love and be loved, I never doubted some woman might be found willing and able to understand my case and accept me, in spite of the curse with which I was burdened.”

“Well, sir?”

“When you are inquisitive, Jane, you always make me smile.
At last, our curate (we had a curate then who made the living answer by teaching the little Lintons and Earnshaws, and farming his bit of land himself) advised that the young man should be sent to college; and Mr. Earnshaw agreed, though with a heavy spirit, for he said—“Hindley was nought, and would never thrive as where he wandered.”

I hoped heartily we should have peace now.
and that when you sneered at and despised me, and—Go on plaguing me, and I’ll step in yonder, and say you worried me out of the kitchen!”

“I didn’t know you took my part,” she answered, drying her eyes; “and I was miserable and bitter at everybody; but now I thank you, and beg you to forgive me: what can I do besides?”

She returned to the hearth, and frankly extended her hand.
When Mrs. Fairfax had bidden me a kind good-night, and I had fastened my door, gazed leisurely round, and in some measure effaced the eerie impression made by that wide hall, that dark and spacious staircase, and that long, cold gallery, by the livelier aspect of my little room, I remembered that, after a day of bodily fatigue and mental anxiety, I was now at last in safe haven.
I asked John to go down to the turn-pike-house, where I had dismissed the chaise, and bring my trunk, which I had left there: and then, while I removed my bonnet and shawl, I questioned Mary as to whether I could be accommodated at the Manor House for the night; and finding that arrangements to that effect, though difficult, would not be impossible, I informed her I should stay.
un’ then, I mud ha’ telled ye, baht all this wark, that that’s just one ye cannut see—he allas keeps it locked, un’ nob’dy iver mells on’t but hisseln.”

“You’ve a nice house, Joseph,” I could not refrain from observing, “and pleasant inmates; and I think the concentrated essence of all the madness in the world took up its abode in my brain the day I linked my fate with theirs!
“Will you walk this way, ma’am?” said the girl; and I followed her across a square hall with high doors all round: she ushered me into a room whose double illumination of fire and candle at first dazzled me, contrasting as it did with the darkness to which my eyes had been for two hours inured; when I could see, however, a cosy and agreeable picture presented itself to my view.
In a state between sleeping and waking, you noticed her entrance and her actions; but feverish, almost delirious as you were, you ascribed to her a goblin appearance different from her own: the long dishevelled hair, the swelled black face, the exaggerated stature, were figments of imagination; results of nightmare: the spiteful tearing of the veil was real: and it is like her.
“Yes; it was to see or hear news of a friend about whom I had for some time been uneasy.”

They might have said, as I have no doubt they thought, that they had believed me to be without any friends save them: for, indeed, I had often said so; but, with their true natural delicacy, they abstained from comment, except that Diana asked me if I was sure I was well enough to travel.
I set my burden on the house-steps by the kitchen-door, and lingered to rest, and drew in a few more breaths of the soft, sweet air; my eyes were on the moon, and my back to the entrance, when I heard a voice behind me say,—“Nelly, is that you?”

It was a deep voice, and foreign in tone; yet there was something in the manner of pronouncing my name which made it sound familiar.
I guess you’ll report what you hear and see to the cipher at the Grange; and this thing won’t be settled while you linger about it.”

“Well,” replied I, “I hope you’ll be kind to the boy, Mr. Heathcliff, or you’ll not keep him long; and he’s all you have akin in the wide world, that you will ever know—remember.”

“I’ll be very kind to him, you needn’t fear,” he said, laughing.
Miss Temple had always something of serenity in her air, of state in her mien, of refined propriety in her language, which precluded deviation into the ardent, the excited, the eager: something which chastened the pleasure of those who looked on her and listened to her, by a controlling sense of awe; and such was my feeling now: but as to Helen Burns, I was struck with wonder.
Forgive me for my passionate language: I was a child then; eight, nine years have passed since that day.”

She heeded nothing of what I said; but when she had tasted the water and drawn breath, she went on thus—

“I tell you I could not forget it; and I took my revenge: for you to be adopted by your uncle, and placed in a state of ease and comfort, was what I could not endure.
The cloven halves were not broken from each other, for the firm base and strong roots kept them unsundered below; though community of vitality was destroyed—the sap could flow no more: their great boughs on each side were dead, and next winter’s tempests would be sure to fell one or both to earth: as yet, however, they might be said to form one tree—a ruin, but an entire ruin.
“Sit there,” she said, placing me on the sofa, “while we take our things off and get the tea ready; it is another privilege we exercise in our little moorland home—to prepare our own meals when we are so inclined, or when Hannah is baking, brewing, washing, or ironing.”

She closed the door, leaving me solus with Mr. St. John, who sat opposite, a book or newspaper in his hand.
I saw—but listen, and you shall hear how I found you out; and Ellen, who is in league with you, and yet pretended to pity me so, when I kept hoping, and was always disappointed about Linton’s coming back!”

She gave a faithful account of her excursion and its consequences; and my master, though he cast more than one reproachful look at me, said nothing till she had concluded.
They woke, they kindled: first, they glowed in the bright tint of her cheek, which till this hour I had never seen but pale and bloodless; then they shone in the liquid lustre of her eyes, which had suddenly acquired a beauty more singular than that of Miss Temple’s—a beauty neither of fine colour nor long eyelash, nor pencilled brow, but of meaning, of movement, of radiance.
I bid them be quiet, now that they saw me returned, and, benumbed to my very heart, I dragged upstairs; whence, after putting on dry clothes, and pacing to and fro thirty or forty minutes, to restore the animal heat, I adjourned to my study, feeble as a kitten: almost too much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and smoking coffee which the servant had prepared for my refreshment.
Catherine and Isabella were sitting in the library, on hostile terms, but silent: the latter alarmed at her recent indiscretion, and the disclosure she had made of her secret feelings in a transient fit of passion; the former, on mature consideration, really offended with her companion; and, if she laughed again at her pertness, inclined to make it no laughing matter to her.
Could it be hurtful to send for some one—some minister of any denomination, it does not matter which—to explain it, and show you how very far you have erred from its precepts; and how unfit you will be for its heaven, unless a change takes place before you die?”

“I’m rather obliged than angry, Nelly,” he said, “for you remind me of the manner in which I desire to be buried.
However, I mentally shake hands with you for your answer, despite its inaccuracy; and as much for the manner in which it was said, as for the substance of the speech; the manner was frank and sincere; one does not often see such a manner: no, on the contrary, affectation, or coldness, or stupid, coarse-minded misapprehension of one’s meaning are the usual rewards of candour.
When we went in, and I had removed her bonnet and coat, I took her on my knee; kept her there an hour, allowing her to prattle as she liked: not rebuking even some little freedoms and trivialities into which she was apt to stray when much noticed, and which betrayed in her a superficiality of character, inherited probably from her mother, hardly congenial to an English mind.
Adèle heard him, and asked if she was to go to school “sans mademoiselle?”

“Yes,” he replied, “absolutely sans mademoiselle; for I am to take mademoiselle to the moon, and there I shall seek a cave in one of the white valleys among the volcano-tops, and mademoiselle shall live with me there, and only me.”

“She will have nothing to eat: you will starve her,” observed Adèle.
I shall keep out of your way all day, as I have been accustomed to do: you may send for me in the evening, when you feel disposed to see me, and I’ll come then; but at no other time.”

“I want a smoke, Jane, or a pinch of snuff, to comfort me under all this, ‘pour me donner une contenance,’ as Adèle would say; and unfortunately I have neither my cigar-case, nor my snuff-box.
He may be coming now, and to meet him will save some minutes of suspense.”

The wind roared high in the great trees which embowered the gates; but the road as far as I could see, to the right hand and the left, was all still and solitary: save for the shadows of clouds crossing it at intervals as the moon looked out, it was but a long pale line, unvaried by one moving speck.
The former was a boy of fourteen, but when he drew out what had been a fiddle, crushed to morsels in the great-coat, he blubbered aloud; and Cathy, when she learned the master had lost her whip in attending on the stranger, showed her humour by grinning and spitting at the stupid little thing; earning for her pains a sound blow from her father, to teach her cleaner manners.
“Promise not to be angry, and you shall know the very truth: I hate to hide it.”

We sat down in the window-seat; I assured her I would not scold, whatever her secret might be, and I guessed it, of course; so she commenced—

“I’ve been to Wuthering Heights, Ellen, and I’ve never missed going a day since you fell ill; except thrice before, and twice after you left your room.
Brocklehurst, I believe I intimated in the letter which I wrote to you three weeks ago, that this little girl has not quite the character and disposition I could wish: should you admit her into Lowood school, I should be glad if the superintendent and teachers were requested to keep a strict eye on her, and, above all, to guard against her worst fault, a tendency to deceit.
“Jane!” recommenced he, with a gentleness that broke me down with grief, and turned me stone-cold with ominous terror—for this still voice was the pant of a lion rising—“Jane, do you mean to go one way in the world, and to let me go another?”

“I do.”

“Jane” (bending towards and embracing me), “do you mean it now?”

“I do.”

“And now?” softly kissing my forehead and cheek.
After the Easter recess, Sir George Lynn, who was lately elected member for Millcote, will have to go up to town and take his seat; I daresay Mr. Rochester will accompany him: it surprises me that he has already made so protracted a stay at Thornfield.”

It was with some trepidation that I perceived the hour approach when I was to repair with my charge to the drawing-room.
I was still listening in thought to her well-remembered tones—still picturing her pale and spiritual aspect, her wasted face and sublime gaze, as she lay on her placid deathbed, and whispered her longing to be restored to her divine Father’s bosom—when a feeble voice murmured from the couch behind: “Who is that?”

I knew Mrs. Reed had not spoken for days: was she reviving?
Now here” (he pointed to the leafy enclosure we had entered) “all is real, sweet, and pure.”

He strayed down a walk edged with box, with apple trees, pear trees, and cherry trees on one side, and a border on the other full of all sorts of old-fashioned flowers, stocks, sweet-williams, primroses, pansies, mingled with southernwood, sweet-briar, and various fragrant herbs.
You—poor and obscure, and small and plain as you are—I entreat to accept me as a husband.”

“What, me!” I ejaculated, beginning in his earnestness—and especially in his incivility—to credit his sincerity: “me who have not a friend in the world but you—if you are my friend: not a shilling but what you have given me?”

“You, Jane, I must have you for my own—entirely my own.
But she could remember Bill Oliver’s father a journeyman needlemaker; and th’ Rivers wor gentry i’ th’ owd days o’ th’ Henrys, as onybody might see by looking into th’ registers i’ Morton Church vestry.” Still, she allowed, “the owd maister was like other folk—naught mich out o’ t’ common way: stark mad o’ shooting, and farming, and sich like.” The mistress was different.
I’d warn you when I came, and then you might let me in unobserved, as soon as she was alone, and watch till I departed, your conscience quite calm: you would be hindering mischief.”

I protested against playing that treacherous part in my employer’s house: and, besides, I urged the cruelty and selfishness of his destroying Mrs. Linton’s tranquillity for his satisfaction.
They were not bound to regard with affection a thing that could not sympathise with one amongst them; a heterogeneous thing, opposed to them in temperament, in capacity, in propensities; a useless thing, incapable of serving their interest, or adding to their pleasure; a noxious thing, cherishing the germs of indignation at their treatment, of contempt of their judgment.
“I little expected such a reception; I anticipated only coldness and stiffness: this is not like what I have heard of the treatment of governesses; but I must not exult too soon.”

She returned; with her own hands cleared her knitting apparatus and a book or two from the table, to make room for the tray which Leah now brought, and then herself handed me the refreshments.
“I cannot commission you to fetch help,” he said; “but you may help me a little yourself, if you will be so kind.”

“Yes, sir.”

“You have not an umbrella that I can use as a stick?”

“No.”

“Try to get hold of my horse’s bridle and lead him to me: you are not afraid?”

I should have been afraid to touch a horse when alone, but when told to do it, I was disposed to obey.
I discerned in the course of the morning that Thornfield Hall was a changed place: no longer silent as a church, it echoed every hour or two to a knock at the door, or a clang of the bell; steps, too, often traversed the hall, and new voices spoke in different keys below; a rill from the outer world was flowing through it; it had a master: for my part, I liked it better.
“And mind,” he continued, “don’t bother me with any details of the anatomical process, or any notice of the condition of the entrails: let your operation be conducted in silence: tiens-toi tranquille, enfant; comprends-tu?”

Adèle seemed scarcely to need the warning; she had already retired to a sofa with her treasure, and was busy untying the cord which secured the lid.
I hardly heard Mrs. Fairfax’s account of the curtain conflagration during dinner, so much was I occupied in puzzling my brains over the enigmatical character of Grace Poole, and still more in pondering the problem of her position at Thornfield and questioning why she had not been given into custody that morning, or, at the very least, dismissed from her master’s service.
Jane” (he turned to me for the first time since his re-entrance), “take this key: go down into my bedroom, and walk straight forward into my dressing-room: open the top drawer of the wardrobe and take out a clean shirt and neck-handkerchief: bring them here; and be nimble.”

I went; sought the repository he had mentioned, found the articles named, and returned with them.
“Well,” I reflected, “if you won’t talk, you may be still; I’ll let you alone now, and return to my book.”

So I snuffed the candle and resumed the perusal of “Marmion.” He soon stirred; my eye was instantly drawn to his movements; he only took out a morocco pocket-book, thence produced a letter, which he read in silence, folded it, put it back, relapsed into meditation.
Thus engaged, he appeared, sitting in his own recess, quiet and absorbed enough; but that blue eye of his had a habit of leaving the outlandish-looking grammar, and wandering over, and sometimes fixing upon us, his fellow-students, with a curious intensity of observation: if caught, it would be instantly withdrawn; yet ever and anon, it returned searchingly to our table.
It was the fifteenth of January, about nine o’clock in the morning: Bessie was gone down to breakfast; my cousins had not yet been summoned to their mama; Eliza was putting on her bonnet and warm garden-coat to go and feed her poultry, an occupation of which she was fond: and not less so of selling the eggs to the housekeeper and hoarding up the money she thus obtained.
Besides, there were fewer to feed; the sick could eat little; our breakfast-basins were better filled; when there was no time to prepare a regular dinner, which often happened, she would give us a large piece of cold pie, or a thick slice of bread and cheese, and this we carried away with us to the wood, where we each chose the spot we liked best, and dined sumptuously.
It seemed to me that, were I a gentleman like him, I would take to my bosom only such a wife as I could love; but the very obviousness of the advantages to the husband’s own happiness offered by this plan convinced me that there must be arguments against its general adoption of which I was quite ignorant: otherwise I felt sure all the world would act as I wished to act.
“And you need help, do you not?”

“I need it, and I seek it so far, sir, that some true philanthropist will put me in the way of getting work which I can do, and the remuneration for which will keep me, if but in the barest necessaries of life.”

“I know not whether I am a true philanthropist; yet I am willing to aid you to the utmost of my power in a purpose so honest.
Happily, an inhabitant of the kitchen made more dispatch; a lusty dame, with tucked-up gown, bare arms, and fire-flushed cheeks, rushed into the midst of us flourishing a frying-pan: and used that weapon, and her tongue, to such purpose, that the storm subsided magically, and she only remained, heaving like a sea after a high wind, when her master entered on the scene.
Afterwards, they dried and combed her beautiful hair, and gave her a pair of enormous slippers, and wheeled her to the fire; and I left her, as merry as she could be, dividing her food between the little dog and Skulker, whose nose she pinched as he ate; and kindling a spark of spirit in the vacant blue eyes of the Lintons—a dim reflection from her own enchanting face.
I mention this in your hearing, Jane, that you may not attempt to impose on Mr. Brocklehurst.”

Well might I dread, well might I dislike Mrs. Reed; for it was her nature to wound me cruelly; never was I happy in her presence; however carefully I obeyed, however strenuously I strove to please her, my efforts were still repulsed and repaid by such sentences as the above.
It is an old saying that ‘all is not gold that glitters;’ and in this case I do fear there will be something found to be different to what either you or I expect.”

“Why?—am I a monster?” I said: “is it impossible that Mr. Rochester should have a sincere affection for me?”

“No: you are very well; and much improved of late; and Mr. Rochester, I daresay, is fond of you.
Last night I cannot tell you what I suffered when I sought all over the house, and could find you nowhere, nor the master either; and then, at twelve o’clock, saw you come in with him.”

“Well, never mind that now,” I interrupted impatiently; “it is enough that all was right.”

“I hope all will be right in the end,” she said: “but believe me, you cannot be too careful.
I was sure St. John Rivers—pure-lived, conscientious, zealous as he was—had not yet found that peace of God which passeth all understanding: he had no more found it, I thought, than had I with my concealed and racking regrets for my broken idol and lost elysium—regrets to which I have latterly avoided referring, but which possessed me and tyrannised over me ruthlessly.
I was going to tell you all about it; but you are in a bad temper, and don’t deserve to hear.”

I picked up her hat, and approached to reinstate it; but perceiving that the people of the house took her part, she commenced capering round the room; and on my giving chase, ran like a mouse over and under and behind the furniture, rendering it ridiculous for me to pursue.
Notwithstanding the doctor’s prophecy, I am rapidly recovering strength; and though it be only the second week in January, I propose getting out on horseback in a day or two, and riding over to Wuthering Heights, to inform my landlord that I shall spend the next six months in London; and, if he likes, he may look out for another tenant to take the place after October.
Go and stand by the door, out of the way of the mirror and the windows.”

I did so, not at first aware what was his intention; but when I saw him lift and poise the book and stand in act to hurl it, I instinctively started aside with a cry of alarm: not soon enough, however; the volume was flung, it hit me, and I fell, striking my head against the door and cutting it.
The lesson had comprised part of the reign of Charles I., and there were sundry questions about tonnage and poundage and ship-money, which most of them appeared unable to answer; still, every little difficulty was solved instantly when it reached Burns: her memory seemed to have retained the substance of the whole lesson, and she was ready with answers on every point.
“You might say all that to almost any one who you knew lived as a solitary dependent in a great house.”

“I might say it to almost any one: but would it be true of almost any one?”

“In my circumstances.”

“Yes; just so, in your circumstances: but find me another precisely placed as you are.”

“It would be easy to find you thousands.”

“You could scarcely find me one.
“What are they doing, Jane?”

“Laughing and talking, sir.”

“They don’t look grave and mysterious, as if they had heard something strange?”

“Not at all: they are full of jests and gaiety.”

“And Mason?”

“He was laughing too.”

“If all these people came in a body and spat at me, what would you do, Jane?”

“Turn them out of the room, sir, if I could.”

He half smiled.
Turning to me, as she took some loaves from the oven, she asked bluntly—

“Did you ever go a-begging afore you came here?”

I was indignant for a moment; but remembering that anger was out of the question, and that I had indeed appeared as a beggar to her, I answered quietly, but still not without a certain marked firmness—

“You are mistaken in supposing me a beggar.
This St. John opposed; he said I did not want dissipation, I wanted employment; my present life was too purposeless, I required an aim; and, I suppose, by way of supplying deficiencies, he prolonged still further my lessons in Hindostanee, and grew more urgent in requiring their accomplishment: and I, like a fool, never thought of resisting him—I could not resist him.
Her grave is in Brocklebridge churchyard: for fifteen years after her death it was only covered by a grassy mound; but now a grey marble tablet marks the spot, inscribed with her name, and the word “Resurgam.”

CHAPTER X
Hitherto I have recorded in detail the events of my insignificant existence: to the first ten years of my life I have given almost as many chapters.
“Don’t send her away, Eshton; we might turn the thing to account; better consult the ladies.” And speaking aloud, he continued—“Ladies, you talked of going to Hay Common to visit the gipsy camp; Sam here says that one of the old Mother Bunches is in the servants’ hall at this moment, and insists upon being brought in before ‘the quality,’ to tell them their fortunes.
The roof has been kept whole hitherto; but as the clergyman’s stipend is only twenty pounds per annum, and a house with two rooms, threatening speedily to determine into one, no clergyman will undertake the duties of pastor: especially as it is currently reported that his flock would rather let him starve than increase the living by one penny from their own pockets.
During this interval, even Adèle was seldom sent for to his presence, and all my acquaintance with him was confined to an occasional rencontre in the hall, on the stairs, or in the gallery, when he would sometimes pass me haughtily and coldly, just acknowledging my presence by a distant nod or a cool glance, and sometimes bow and smile with gentlemanlike affability.
“It is my opinion the fiddler David must have been an insipid sort of fellow; I like black Bothwell better: to my mind a man is nothing without a spice of the devil in him; and history may say what it will of James Hepburn, but I have a notion, he was just the sort of wild, fierce, bandit hero whom I could have consented to gift with my hand.”

“Gentlemen, you hear!
According as the shifting obscurity and flickering gleam hovered here or glanced there, it was now the bearded physician, Luke, that bent his brow; now St. John’s long hair that waved; and anon the devilish face of Judas, that grew out of the panel, and seemed gathering life and threatening a revelation of the arch-traitor—of Satan himself—in his subordinate’s form.
But no—eventide is as pleasant to him as to me, and this antique garden as attractive; and he strolls on, now lifting the gooseberry-tree branches to look at the fruit, large as plums, with which they are laden; now taking a ripe cherry from the wall; now stooping towards a knot of flowers, either to inhale their fragrance or to admire the dew-beads on their petals.
Just at sunset, the air turned cold and the sky cloudy: I went in, Sophie called me upstairs to look at my wedding-dress, which they had just brought; and under it in the box I found your present—the veil which, in your princely extravagance, you sent for from London: resolved, I suppose, since I would not have jewels, to cheat me into accepting something as costly.
The stillness of early morning slumbered everywhere; the curtains were yet drawn over the servants’ chamber windows; little birds were just twittering in the blossom-blanched orchard trees, whose boughs drooped like white garlands over the wall enclosing one side of the yard; the carriage horses stamped from time to time in their closed stables: all else was still.
While such honey-dew fell, such silence reigned, such gloaming gathered, I felt as if I could haunt such shade for ever; but in threading the flower and fruit parterres at the upper part of the enclosure, enticed there by the light the now rising moon cast on this more open quarter, my step is stayed—not by sound, not by sight, but once more by a warning fragrance.
He had been called away by the sudden death of his father: he was at Marsh End now, and would very likely stay there a fortnight longer.”

“Was there any lady of the house?”

“Nay, there was naught but her, and she was housekeeper;” and of her, reader, I could not bear to ask the relief for want of which I was sinking; I could not yet beg; and again I crawled away.
“No,” he said coolly: “when you have indicated to us the residence of your friends, we can write to them, and you may be restored to home.”

“That, I must plainly tell you, is out of my power to do; being absolutely without home and friends.”

The three looked at me, but not distrustfully; I felt there was no suspicion in their glances: there was more of curiosity.
Come—tell me.”

“I will think what you like, sir: I am content to be only your nurse, if you think it better.”

“But you cannot always be my nurse, Janet: you are young—you must marry one day.”

“I don’t care about being married.”

“You should care, Janet: if I were what I once was, I would try to make you care—but—a sightless block!”

He relapsed again into gloom.
I brushed Adèle’s hair and made her neat, and having ascertained that I was myself in my usual Quaker trim, where there was nothing to retouch—all being too close and plain, braided locks included, to admit of disarrangement—we descended, Adèle wondering whether the petit coffre was at length come; for, owing to some mistake, its arrival had hitherto been delayed.
The sounds I had heard after the scream, and the words that had been uttered, had probably been heard only by me; for they had proceeded from the room above mine: but they assured me that it was not a servant’s dream which had thus struck horror through the house; and that the explanation Mr. Rochester had given was merely an invention framed to pacify his guests.
I heard them clear and soft: a thought too solemn perhaps, but sweet as music—‘I think it is a glorious thing to have the hope of living with you, Edward, because I love you.’ Do you love me, Jane?—repeat it.”

“I do, sir—I do, with my whole heart.”

“Well,” he said, after some minutes’ silence, “it is strange; but that sentence has penetrated my breast painfully.
Oh, intolerable questions, when I could do nothing and go nowhere!—when a long way must yet be measured by my weary, trembling limbs before I could reach human habitation—when cold charity must be entreated before I could get a lodging: reluctant sympathy importuned, almost certain repulse incurred, before my tale could be listened to, or one of my wants relieved!
My clothes hung loose on me; for I was much wasted, but I covered deficiencies with a shawl, and once more, clean and respectable looking—no speck of the dirt, no trace of the disorder I so hated, and which seemed so to degrade me, left—I crept down a stone staircase with the aid of the banisters, to a narrow low passage, and found my way presently to the kitchen.
Before I came to live here, she commenced—waiting no farther invitation to her story—I was almost always at Wuthering Heights; because my mother had nursed Mr. Hindley Earnshaw, that was Hareton’s father, and I got used to playing with the children: I ran errands too, and helped to make hay, and hung about the farm ready for anything that anybody would set me to.
They sat together in a window whose lattice lay back against the wall, and displayed, beyond the garden trees, and the wild green park, the valley of Gimmerton, with a long line of mist winding nearly to its top (for very soon after you pass the chapel, as you may have noticed, the sough that runs from the marshes joins a beck which follows the bend of the glen).
He’s barely twenty-seven, it seems; that’s your own age: who would have thought you were born in one year?”

I confess this blow was greater to me than the shock of Mrs. Linton’s death: ancient associations lingered round my heart; I sat down in the porch and wept as for a blood relation, desiring Mr. Kenneth to get another servant to introduce him to the master.
Then they seemed so familiar with French names and French authors: but my amazement reached its climax when Miss Temple asked Helen if she sometimes snatched a moment to recall the Latin her father had taught her, and taking a book from a shelf, bade her read and construe a page of Virgil; and Helen obeyed, my organ of veneration expanding at every sounding line.
Dismiss her, by all means, at once!”

“But I cannot persuade her to go away, my lady,” said the footman; “nor can any of the servants: Mrs. Fairfax is with her just now, entreating her to be gone; but she has taken a chair in the chimney-corner, and says nothing shall stir her from it till she gets leave to come in here.”

“What does she want?” asked Mrs. Eshton.
Sir George Lynn was talking of a Reed of Gateshead yesterday, who, he said, was one of the veriest rascals on town; and Ingram was mentioning a Georgiana Reed of the same place, who was much admired for her beauty a season or two ago in London.”

“John Reed is dead, too, sir: he ruined himself and half-ruined his family, and is supposed to have committed suicide.
Her own fortune she had taken care to secure; and when her mother died—and it was wholly improbable, she tranquilly remarked, that she should either recover or linger long—she would execute a long-cherished project: seek a retirement where punctual habits would be permanently secured from disturbance, and place safe barriers between herself and a frivolous world.
This was cowardly: I should have appealed to your nobleness and magnanimity at first, as I do now—opened to you plainly my life of agony—described to you my hunger and thirst after a higher and worthier existence—shown to you, not my resolution (that word is weak), but my resistless bent to love faithfully and well, where I am faithfully and well loved in return.
I held no communication with him: still, I was conscious of his design to enter, if he could; and on the Tuesday, a little after dark, when my master, from sheer fatigue, had been compelled to retire a couple of hours, I went and opened one of the windows; moved by his perseverance to give him a chance of bestowing on the faded image of his idol one final adieu.
I’ll not disguise but you might kill him if you were wild and reckless, and cherished a foolish, fanciful affection for the son of a person who would be glad to have him in his grave; and allowed him to discover that you fretted over the separation he has judged it expedient to make.”

“I fret about nothing on earth except papa’s illness,” answered my companion.
While disease had thus become an inhabitant of Lowood, and death its frequent visitor; while there was gloom and fear within its walls; while its rooms and passages steamed with hospital smells, the drug and the pastille striving vainly to overcome the effluvia of mortality, that bright May shone unclouded over the bold hills and beautiful woodland out of doors.
I was confirmed in this idea by the fact of her once or twice coming downstairs on very warm sunny afternoons, and being taken by Miss Temple into the garden; but, on these occasions, I was not allowed to go and speak to her; I only saw her from the schoolroom window, and then not distinctly; for she was much wrapped up, and sat at a distance under the verandah.
I was actually permitting myself to experience a sickening sense of disappointment; but rallying my wits, and recollecting my principles, I at once called my sensations to order; and it was wonderful how I got over the temporary blunder—how I cleared up the mistake of supposing Mr. Rochester’s movements a matter in which I had any cause to take a vital interest.
Am I right, Baroness Ingram, of Ingram Park?”

“My lily-flower, you are right now, as always.”

“Then no more need be said: change the subject.”

Amy Eshton, not hearing or not heeding this dictum, joined in with her soft, infantine tone: “Louisa and I used to quiz our governess too; but she was such a good creature, she would bear anything: nothing put her out.
Your own fortune will make you independent of the Society’s aid; and thus you may still be spared the dishonour of breaking your promise and deserting the band you engaged to join.”

Now I never had, as the reader knows, either given any formal promise or entered into any engagement; and this language was all much too hard and much too despotic for the occasion.
The last, however, goes for nothing: you would love him without that, probably; and with it you wouldn’t, unless he possessed the four former attractions.”

“No, to be sure not: I should only pity him—hate him, perhaps, if he were ugly, and a clown.”

“But there are several other handsome, rich young men in the world: handsomer, possibly, and richer than he is.
Mrs. Reed surveyed me at times with a severe eye, but seldom addressed me: since my illness, she had drawn a more marked line of separation than ever between me and her own children; appointing me a small closet to sleep in by myself, condemning me to take my meals alone, and pass all my time in the nursery, while my cousins were constantly in the drawing-room.
Few children can eat when excited with the thoughts of a journey; nor could I. Bessie, having pressed me in vain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and bread she had prepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits in a paper and put them into my bag; then she helped me on with my pelisse and bonnet, and wrapping herself in a shawl, she and I left the nursery.
Its grey front stood out well from the background of a rookery, whose cawing tenants were now on the wing: they flew over the lawn and grounds to alight in a great meadow, from which these were separated by a sunk fence, and where an array of mighty old thorn trees, strong, knotty, and broad as oaks, at once explained the etymology of the mansion’s designation.
When I was as old as you, I was a feeling fellow enough; partial to the unfledged, unfostered, and unlucky; but Fortune has knocked me about since: she has even kneaded me with her knuckles, and now I flatter myself I am hard and tough as an India-rubber ball; pervious, though, through a chink or two still, and with one sentient point in the middle of the lump.
Your eyes dwell on a Vulcan,—a real blacksmith, brown, broad-shouldered: and blind and lame into the bargain.”

“I never thought of it, before; but you certainly are rather like Vulcan, sir.”

“Well, you can leave me, ma’am: but before you go” (and he retained me by a firmer grasp than ever), “you will be pleased just to answer me a question or two.” He paused.
He raised his missile to hurl it; I commenced a soothing speech, but could not stay his hand: the stone struck my bonnet; and then ensued, from the stammering lips of the little fellow, a string of curses, which, whether he comprehended them or not, were delivered with practised emphasis, and distorted his baby features into a shocking expression of malignity.
“I have never heard Mr. Rochester’s voice or step in the house to-day; but surely I shall see him before night: I feared the meeting in the morning; now I desire it, because expectation has been so long baffled that it is grown impatient.”

When dusk actually closed, and when Adèle left me to go and play in the nursery with Sophie, I did most keenly desire it.
I could not unlove him, because I felt sure he would soon marry this very lady—because I read daily in her a proud security in his intentions respecting her—because I witnessed hourly in him a style of courtship which, if careless and choosing rather to be sought than to seek, was yet, in its very carelessness, captivating, and in its very pride, irresistible.
Heathcliff took the handsomest, but it soon fell lame, and when he discovered it, he said to Hindley—

“You must exchange horses with me: I don’t like mine; and if you won’t I shall tell your father of the three thrashings you’ve given me this week, and show him my arm, which is black to the shoulder.” Hindley put out his tongue, and cuffed him over the ears.
Little Hareton, who followed me everywhere, and was sitting near me on the floor, at seeing my tears commenced crying himself, and sobbed out complaints against “wicked aunt Cathy,” which drew her fury on to his unlucky head: she seized his shoulders, and shook him till the poor child waxed livid, and Edgar thoughtlessly laid hold of her hands to deliver him.
Her hat was hung against the wall, and she seemed perfectly at home, laughing and chattering, in the best spirits imaginable, to Hareton—now a great, strong lad of eighteen—who stared at her with considerable curiosity and astonishment: comprehending precious little of the fluent succession of remarks and questions which her tongue never ceased pouring forth.
For myself, I had no need to make any change; I should not be called upon to quit my sanctum of the schoolroom; for a sanctum it was now become to me,—“a very pleasant refuge in time of trouble.”

It had been a mild, serene spring day—one of those days which, towards the end of March or the beginning of April, rise shining over the earth as heralds of summer.
I wrestled with my own resolution: I wanted to be weak that I might avoid the awful passage of further suffering I saw laid out for me; and Conscience, turned tyrant, held Passion by the throat, told her tauntingly, she had yet but dipped her dainty foot in the slough, and swore that with that arm of iron he would thrust her down to unsounded depths of agony.
I am sure you cannot long be content to pass your leisure in solitude, and to devote your working hours to a monotonous labour wholly void of stimulus: any more than I can be content,” he added, with emphasis, “to live here buried in morass, pent in with mountains—my nature, that God gave me, contravened; my faculties, heaven-bestowed, paralysed—made useless.
And now it is deluged with a nectarous flood—the young germs swamped—delicious poison cankering them: now I see myself stretched on an ottoman in the drawing-room at Vale Hall at my bride Rosamond Oliver’s feet: she is talking to me with her sweet voice—gazing down on me with those eyes your skilful hand has copied so well—smiling at me with these coral lips.
The master told me to light a fire in the many-weeks’ deserted parlour, and to set an easy-chair in the sunshine by the window; and then he brought her down, and she sat a long while enjoying the genial heat, and, as we expected, revived by the objects round her: which, though familiar, were free from the dreary associations investing her hated sick chamber.
I can give them no attention any more.”

“But what do you mean by a change, Mr. Heathcliff?” I said, alarmed at his manner: though he was neither in danger of losing his senses, nor dying, according to my judgment: he was quite strong and healthy; and, as to his reason, from childhood he had a delight in dwelling on dark things, and entertaining odd fancies.
Miss Temple had looked down when he first began to speak to her; but she now gazed straight before her, and her face, naturally pale as marble, appeared to be assuming also the coldness and fixity of that material; especially her mouth, closed as if it would have required a sculptor’s chisel to open it, and her brow settled gradually into petrified severity.
She, however, did not die: but I said she did—I wish she had died!”

“A strange wish, Mrs. Reed; why do you hate her so?”

“I had a dislike to her mother always; for she was my husband’s only sister, and a great favourite with him: he opposed the family’s disowning her when she made her low marriage; and when news came of her death, he wept like a simpleton.
“Well, I cannot return to the house,” I thought; “I cannot sit by the fireside, while he is abroad in inclement weather: better tire my limbs than strain my heart; I will go forward and meet him.”

I set out; I walked fast, but not far: ere I had measured a quarter of a mile, I heard the tramp of hoofs; a horseman came on, full gallop; a dog ran by his side.
Indeed, he would have carpeted and papered a small spare room for a parlour; but his wife expressed such pleasure at the white floor and huge glowing fireplace, at the pewter dishes and delf-case, and dog-kennel, and the wide space there was to move about in where they usually sat, that he thought it unnecessary to her comfort, and so dropped the intention.
On her seventeenth birthday, he did not visit the churchyard: it was raining, and I observed—“You’ll surely not go out to-night, sir?”

He answered,—“No, I’ll defer it this year a little longer.” He wrote again to Linton, expressing his great desire to see him; and, had the invalid been presentable, I’ve no doubt his father would have permitted him to come.
We reached the threshold; Catherine walked in, and I stood waiting till she had conducted the invalid to a chair, expecting her out immediately; when Mr. Heathcliff, pushing me forward, exclaimed—“My house is not stricken with the plague, Nelly; and I have a mind to be hospitable to-day: sit down, and allow me to shut the door.”

He shut and locked it also.
The two younger of the trio (fine girls of sixteen and seventeen) had grey beaver hats, then in fashion, shaded with ostrich plumes, and from under the brim of this graceful head-dress fell a profusion of light tresses, elaborately curled; the elder lady was enveloped in a costly velvet shawl, trimmed with ermine, and she wore a false front of French curls.
Mason will not defy me; nor, knowing it, will he hurt me—but, unintentionally, he might in a moment, by one careless word, deprive me, if not of life, yet for ever of happiness.”

“Tell him to be cautious, sir: let him know what you fear, and show him how to avert the danger.”

He laughed sardonically, hastily took my hand, and as hastily threw it from him.
“Well,” said Mr. Rochester, gazing inquiringly into my eyes, “how is my Janet now?”

“The night is serene, sir; and so am I.”

“And you will not dream of separation and sorrow to-night; but of happy love and blissful union.”

This prediction was but half fulfilled: I did not indeed dream of sorrow, but as little did I dream of joy; for I never slept at all.
I should not shrink from you with disgust as I did from her: in your quiet moments you should have no watcher and no nurse but me; and I could hang over you with untiring tenderness, though you gave me no smile in return; and never weary of gazing into your eyes, though they had no longer a ray of recognition for me.—But why do I follow that train of ideas?
I have always faithfully observed the one, up to the very moment of bursting, sometimes with volcanic vehemence, into the other; and as neither present circumstances warranted, nor my present mood inclined me to mutiny, I observed careful obedience to St. John’s directions; and in ten minutes I was treading the wild track of the glen, side by side with him.
“But you are passionate, Jane, that you must allow: and now return to the nursery—there’s a dear—and lie down a little.”

“I am not your dear; I cannot lie down: send me to school soon, Mrs. Reed, for I hate to live here.”

“I will indeed send her to school soon,” murmured Mrs. Reed sotto voce; and gathering up her work, she abruptly quitted the apartment.
Know that I doat on Corsairs; and for that reason, sing it con spirito.”

“Commands from Miss Ingram’s lips would put spirit into a mug of milk and water.”

“Take care, then: if you don’t please me, I will shame you by showing how such things should be done.”

“That is offering a premium on incapacity: I shall now endeavour to fail.”

“Gardez-vous en bien!
one figure whose movements you follow with at least curiosity?”

“I like to observe all the faces and all the figures.”

“But do you never single one from the rest—or it may be, two?”

“I do frequently; when the gestures or looks of a pair seem telling a tale: it amuses me to watch them.”

“What tale do you like best to hear?”

“Oh, I have not much choice!
“Let another help me!”

“No; you shall tear yourself away, none shall help you: you shall yourself pluck out your right eye; yourself cut off your right hand: your heart shall be the victim, and you the priest to transfix it.”

I rose up suddenly, terror-struck at the solitude which so ruthless a judge haunted,—at the silence which so awful a voice filled.
th’ owd man wad ha’ laced ’em properly—but he’s goan!’

“Hindley hurried up from his paradise on the hearth, and seizing one of us by the collar, and the other by the arm, hurled both into the back-kitchen; where, Joseph asseverated, ‘owd Nick’ would fetch us as sure as we were living: and, so comforted, we each sought a separate nook to await his advent.
On an afternoon in October, or the beginning of November—a fresh watery afternoon, when the turf and paths were rustling with moist, withered leaves, and the cold blue sky was half hidden by clouds—dark grey streamers, rapidly mounting from the west, and boding abundant rain—I requested my young lady to forego her ramble, because I was certain of showers.
And believe that your kindness has made me love you deeper than if I deserved your love: and though I couldn’t, and cannot help showing my nature to you, I regret it and repent it; and shall regret and repent it till I die!’

“I felt he spoke the truth; and I felt I must forgive him: and, though we should quarrel the next moment, I must forgive him again.
You delight in half-phrases.”

“Till I can’t help it.”

“Do you suppose I eat like an ogre or a ghoul, that you dread being the companion of my repast?”

“I have formed no supposition on the subject, sir; but I want to go on as usual for another month.”

“You will give up your governessing slavery at once.”

“Indeed, begging your pardon, sir, I shall not.
Instinctively I turned my face again to the village; I found the shop again, and I went in; and though others were there besides the woman I ventured the request—“Would she give me a roll for this handkerchief?”

She looked at me with evident suspicion: “Nay, she never sold stuff i’ that way.”

Almost desperate, I asked for half a cake; she again refused.
There was an enjoyment in accepting their simple kindness, and in repaying it by a consideration—a scrupulous regard to their feelings—to which they were not, perhaps, at all times accustomed, and which both charmed and benefited them; because, while it elevated them in their own eyes, it made them emulous to merit the deferential treatment they received.
When he saw my horse’s breast fairly pushing the barrier, he did put out his hand to unchain it, and then sullenly preceded me up the causeway, calling, as we entered the court,—“Joseph, take Mr. Lockwood’s horse; and bring up some wine.”

“Here we have the whole establishment of domestics, I suppose,” was the reflection suggested by this compound order.
However, if I am to follow my story in true gossip’s fashion, I had better go on; and instead of leaping three years, I will be content to pass to the next summer—the summer of 1778, that is nearly twenty-three years ago.”

CHAPTER VIII
On the morning of a fine June day my first bonny little nursling, and the last of the ancient Earnshaw stock, was born.
Miss Cathy—conversant with no bad deeds except her own slight acts of disobedience, injustice, and passion, arising from hot temper and thoughtlessness, and repented of on the day they were committed—was amazed at the blackness of spirit that could brood on and cover revenge for years, and deliberately prosecute its plans without a visitation of remorse.
I did call him once, and he threatened to strangle her if she was not quiet; but she began again the instant he left the room, moaning and grieving all night long, though I screamed for vexation that I couldn’t sleep.”

“Is Mr. Heathcliff out?” I inquired, perceiving that the wretched creature had no power to sympathize with his cousin’s mental tortures.
I had a theoretical reverence and homage for beauty, elegance, gallantry, fascination; but had I met those qualities incarnate in masculine shape, I should have known instinctively that they neither had nor could have sympathy with anything in me, and should have shunned them as one would fire, lightning, or anything else that is bright but antipathetic.
I was now able to concentrate my attention on the group by the fire, and I presently gathered that the new-comer was called Mr. Mason; then I learned that he was but just arrived in England, and that he came from some hot country: which was the reason, doubtless, his face was so sallow, and that he sat so near the hearth, and wore a surtout in the house.
I did not know whether to resent this language or pursue my explanation; but he seemed so powerfully affected that I took pity and proceeded with my dreams; affirming I had never heard the appellation of “Catherine Linton” before, but reading it often over produced an impression which personified itself when I had no longer my imagination under control.
Earnshaw sat, morose as usual, at the chimney corner, and my little mistress was beguiling an idle hour with drawing pictures on the window-panes, varying her amusement by smothered bursts of songs, and whispered ejaculations, and quick glances of annoyance and impatience in the direction of her cousin, who steadfastly smoked, and looked into the grate.
It does good to no woman to be flattered by her superior, who cannot possibly intend to marry her; and it is madness in all women to let a secret love kindle within them, which, if unreturned and unknown, must devour the life that feeds it; and, if discovered and responded to, must lead, ignis-fatuus-like, into miry wilds whence there is no extrication.
Last January, rid of all mistresses—in a harsh, bitter frame of mind, the result of a useless, roving, lonely life—corroded with disappointment, sourly disposed against all men, and especially against all womankind (for I began to regard the notion of an intellectual, faithful, loving woman as a mere dream), recalled by business, I came back to England.
So, from the very beginning, he bred bad feeling in the house; and at Mrs. Earnshaw’s death, which happened in less than two years after, the young master had learned to regard his father as an oppressor rather than a friend, and Heathcliff as a usurper of his parent’s affections and his privileges; and he grew bitter with brooding over these injuries.
But Heathcliff affirms his principal reason for resuming a connection with his ancient persecutor is a wish to install himself in quarters at walking distance from the Grange, and an attachment to the house where we lived together; and likewise a hope that I shall have more opportunities of seeing him there than I could have if he settled in Gimmerton.
He dreams of you day and night, and cannot be persuaded that you don’t hate him, since you neither write nor call.”

I closed the door, and rolled a stone to assist the loosened lock in holding it; and spreading my umbrella, I drew my charge underneath: for the rain began to drive through the moaning branches of the trees, and warned us to avoid delay.
“Place the child upon it.”

And I was placed there, by whom I don’t know: I was in no condition to note particulars; I was only aware that they had hoisted me up to the height of Mr. Brocklehurst’s nose, that he was within a yard of me, and that a spread of shot orange and purple silk pelisses and a cloud of silvery plumage extended and waved below me.
I have examined Adèle, and find you have taken great pains with her: she is not bright, she has no talents; yet in a short time she has made much improvement.”

“Sir, you have now given me my ‘cadeau;’ I am obliged to you: it is the meed teachers most covet—praise of their pupils’ progress.”

“Humph!” said Mr. Rochester, and he took his tea in silence.
“I shall gather manna for her morning and night: the plains and hillsides in the moon are bleached with manna, Adèle.”

“She will want to warm herself: what will she do for a fire?”

“Fire rises out of the lunar mountains: when she is cold, I’ll carry her up to a peak, and lay her down on the edge of a crater.”

“Oh, qu’elle y sera mal—peu comfortable!
However, on this night, she set fire first to the hangings of the room next her own, and then she got down to a lower storey, and made her way to the chamber that had been the governess’s—(she was like as if she knew somehow how matters had gone on, and had a spite at her)—and she kindled the bed there; but there was nobody sleeping in it, fortunately.
My conjecture had been correct: the strangers had slipped in before us, and they now stood by the vault of the Rochesters, their backs towards us, viewing through the rails the old time-stained marble tomb, where a kneeling angel guarded the remains of Damer de Rochester, slain at Marston Moor in the time of the civil wars, and of Elizabeth, his wife.
Have you washed your hands and face this morning?” I gave another tug before I answered, for I wanted the bird to be secure of its bread: the sash yielded; I scattered the crumbs, some on the stone sill, some on the cherry-tree bough, then, closing the window, I replied—

“No, Bessie; I have only just finished dusting.”

“Troublesome, careless child!
Mr. Rivers came up as, having seen the classes, now numbering sixty girls, file out before me, and locked the door, I stood with the key in my hand, exchanging a few words of special farewell with some half-dozen of my best scholars: as decent, respectable, modest, and well-informed young women as could be found in the ranks of the British peasantry.
Her constitution is both sound and elastic;—better calculated to endure variations of climate than many more robust.”

And when I returned, sometimes a good deal tired, and not a little weather-beaten, I never dared complain, because I saw that to murmur would be to vex him: on all occasions fortitude pleased him; the reverse was a special annoyance.
I went to hide little Hareton, and to take the shot out of the master’s fowling-piece, which he was fond of playing with in his insane excitement, to the hazard of the lives of any who provoked, or even attracted his notice too much; and I had hit upon the plan of removing it, that he might do less mischief if he did go the length of firing the gun.
My master kept his room; I took possession of the lonely parlour, converting it into a nursery: and there I was, sitting with the moaning doll of a child laid on my knee; rocking it to and fro, and watching, meanwhile, the still driving flakes build up the uncurtained window, when the door opened, and some person entered, out of breath and laughing!
I was much vexed at her and the servant for their mutual revelations; having no doubt of Linton’s approaching arrival, communicated by the former, being reported to Mr. Heathcliff; and feeling as confident that Catherine’s first thought on her father’s return would be to seek an explanation of the latter’s assertion concerning her rude-bred kindred.
Yet,” suggested the secret voice which talks to us in our own hearts, “you are not beautiful either, and perhaps Mr. Rochester approves you: at any rate, you have often felt as if he did; and last night—remember his words; remember his look; remember his voice!”

I well remembered all; language, glance, and tone seemed at the moment vividly renewed.
I have spoken my mind, and can go anywhere now.”

“Jane, be still; don’t struggle so, like a wild frantic bird that is rending its own plumage in its desperation.”

“I am no bird; and no net ensnares me; I am a free human being with an independent will, which I now exert to leave you.”

Another effort set me at liberty, and I stood erect before him.
Look wicked, Jane: as you know well how to look: coin one of your wild, shy, provoking smiles; tell me you hate me—tease me, vex me; do anything but move me: I would rather be incensed than saddened.”

“I will tease you and vex you to your heart’s content, when I have finished my tale: but hear me to the end.”

“I thought, Jane, you had told me all.
His, under such circumstances, is the destiny of the pioneer; and the first pioneers of the Gospel were the Apostles—their captain was Jesus, the Redeemer, Himself.”

“Well?” I said, as he again paused—“proceed.”

He looked at me before he proceeded: indeed, he seemed leisurely to read my face, as if its features and lines were characters on a page.
However, she’ll suit this house so much the better for not being over nice, and I’ll take care she does not disgrace me by rambling abroad.”

“Well, sir,” returned I, “I hope you’ll consider that Mrs. Heathcliff is accustomed to be looked after and waited on; and that she has been brought up like an only daughter, whom every one was ready to serve.
And I bribed the sexton to pull it away when I’m laid there, and slide mine out too; I’ll have it made so: and then by the time Linton gets to us he’ll not know which is which!”

“You were very wicked, Mr. Heathcliff!” I exclaimed; “were you not ashamed to disturb the dead?”

“I disturbed nobody, Nelly,” he replied; “and I gave some ease to myself.
No minister need come; nor need anything be said over me.—I tell you I have nearly attained my heaven; and that of others is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me.”

“And supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast, and died by that means, and they refused to bury you in the precincts of the kirk?” I said, shocked at his godless indifference.
As I shall not have occasion to refer either to her or her sister again, I may as well mention here, that Georgiana made an advantageous match with a wealthy worn-out man of fashion, and that Eliza actually took the veil, and is at this day superior of the convent where she passed the period of her novitiate, and which she endowed with her fortune.
Little girl, here is a book entitled the ‘Child’s Guide’; read it with prayer, especially that part containing ‘An account of the awfully sudden death of Martha G——, a naughty child addicted to falsehood and deceit.’”

With these words Mr. Brocklehurst put into my hand a thin pamphlet sewn in a cover, and having rung for his carriage, he departed.
Even when we finally retired for the night, the inevitable Miss Gryce was still my companion: we had only a short end of candle in our candlestick, and I dreaded lest she should talk till it was all burnt out; fortunately, however, the heavy supper she had eaten produced a soporific effect: she was already snoring before I had finished undressing.
“If you are hurt, and want help, sir, I can fetch some one either from Thornfield Hall or from Hay.”

“Thank you: I shall do: I have no broken bones,—only a sprain;” and again he stood up and tried his foot, but the result extorted an involuntary “Ugh!”

Something of daylight still lingered, and the moon was waxing bright: I could see him plainly.
One strong proof of my wretchedly defective nature is, that even her expostulations, so mild, so rational, have not influence to cure me of my faults; and even her praise, though I value it most highly, cannot stimulate me to continued care and foresight.”

“That is curious,” said I, “it is so easy to be careful.”

“For you I have no doubt it is.
I wished to see Jane Eyre, and I fancy a likeness where none exists: besides, in eight years she must be so changed.” I now gently assured her that I was the person she supposed and desired me to be: and seeing that I was understood, and that her senses were quite collected, I explained how Bessie had sent her husband to fetch me from Thornfield.
I saw plainly how you would look; and heard your impetuous republican answers, and your haughty disavowal of any necessity on your part to augment your wealth, or elevate your standing, by marrying either a purse or a coronet.”

“How well you read me, you witch!” interposed Mr. Rochester: “but what did you find in the veil besides its embroidery?
In the tractability with which, at my wish, you forsook a study in which you were interested, and adopted another because it interested me; in the untiring assiduity with which you have since persevered in it—in the unflagging energy and unshaken temper with which you have met its difficulties—I acknowledge the complement of the qualities I seek.
This time, I remembered I was lying in the oak closet, and I heard distinctly the gusty wind, and the driving of the snow; I heard, also, the fir bough repeat its teasing sound, and ascribed it to the right cause: but it annoyed me so much, that I resolved to silence it, if possible; and, I thought, I rose and endeavoured to unhasp the casement.
And on their behalf he added that night a special prayer to the usual quarter-of-an-hour’s supplication before meat, and would have tacked another to the end of the grace, had not his young mistress broken in upon him with a hurried command that he must run down the road, and, wherever Heathcliff had rambled, find and make him re-enter directly!
I explained how he objected to the whole household at the Heights, and how sorry he would be to find she had been there; but I insisted most on the fact, that if she revealed my negligence of his orders, he would perhaps be so angry that I should have to leave; and Cathy couldn’t bear that prospect: she pledged her word, and kept it for my sake.
She began muttering,—

“The flame flickers in the eye; the eye shines like dew; it looks soft and full of feeling; it smiles at my jargon: it is susceptible; impression follows impression through its clear sphere; where it ceases to smile, it is sad; an unconscious lassitude weighs on the lid: that signifies melancholy resulting from loneliness.
You need not think that because we chanced to be born of the same parents, I shall suffer you to fasten me down by even the feeblest claim: I can tell you this—if the whole human race, ourselves excepted, were swept away, and we two stood alone on the earth, I would leave you in the old world, and betake myself to the new.”

She closed her lips.
He would then say, with a peculiar smile, more solemn than cheerful—

“And if I let a gust of wind or a sprinkling of rain turn me aside from these easy tasks, what preparation would such sloth be for the future I propose to myself?”

Diana and Mary’s general answer to this question was a sigh, and some minutes of apparently mournful meditation.
It is the Rock of Ages I ask you to lean on: do not doubt but it will bear the weight of your human weakness.”

“I do not understand a missionary life: I have never studied missionary labours.”

“There I, humble as I am, can give you the aid you want: I can set you your task from hour to hour; stand by you always; help you from moment to moment.
In that manner Hareton, who should now be the first gentleman in the neighbourhood, was reduced to a state of complete dependence on his father’s inveterate enemy; and lives in his own house as a servant, deprived of the advantage of wages: quite unable to right himself, because of his friendlessness, and his ignorance that he has been wronged.
The first day or two my charge sat in a corner of the library, too sad for either reading or playing: in that quiet state she caused me little trouble; but it was succeeded by an interval of impatient, fretful weariness; and being too busy, and too old then, to run up and down amusing her, I hit on a method by which she might entertain herself.
I will speak to Miss Temple and the teachers.”

“I should wish her to be brought up in a manner suiting her prospects,” continued my benefactress; “to be made useful, to be kept humble: as for the vacations, she will, with your permission, spend them always at Lowood.”

“Your decisions are perfectly judicious, madam,” returned Mr. Brocklehurst.
Not that I humbled myself by a slavish notion of inferiority: on the contrary, I just said—

“You have nothing to do with the master of Thornfield, further than to receive the salary he gives you for teaching his protégée, and to be grateful for such respectful and kind treatment as, if you do your duty, you have a right to expect at his hands.
This is t’ way on ’t:—up at sun-down: dice, brandy, cloised shutters, und can’le-light till next day at noon: then, t’fooil gangs banning und raving to his cham’er, makking dacent fowks dig thur fingers i’ thur lugs fur varry shame; un’ the knave, why he can caint his brass, un’ ate, un’ sleep, un’ off to his neighbour’s to gossip wi’ t’ wife.
You’ll not be surprised, Ellen, at my feeling particularly cheerless, seated in worse than solitude on that inhospitable hearth, and remembering that four miles distant lay my delightful home, containing the only people I loved on earth; and there might as well be the Atlantic to part us, instead of those four miles: I could not overpass them!
“Hush, hush!” I whispered; “people can have many cousins and of all sorts, Miss Cathy, without being any the worse for it; only they needn’t keep their company, if they be disagreeable and bad.”

“He’s not—he’s not my cousin, Ellen!” she went on, gathering fresh grief from reflection, and flinging herself into my arms for refuge from the idea.
Will you clamber up, and pluck it to show to papa?” Cathy stared a long time at the lonely blossom trembling in its earthy shelter, and replied, at length—“No, I’ll not touch it: but it looks melancholy, does it not, Ellen?”

“Yes,” I observed, “about as starved and suckless as you: your cheeks are bloodless; let us take hold of hands and run.
Amy and Louisa Eshton had cried out simultaneously—

“What a love of a child!”

And then they had called her to a sofa, where she now sat, ensconced between them, chattering alternately in French and broken English; absorbing not only the young ladies’ attention, but that of Mrs. Eshton and Lady Lynn, and getting spoilt to her heart’s content.
He and Miss Wilson took the liberty of falling in love with each other—at least Tedo and I thought so; we surprised sundry tender glances and sighs which we interpreted as tokens of ‘la belle passion,’ and I promise you the public soon had the benefit of our discovery; we employed it as a sort of lever to hoist our dead-weights from the house.
It was only yesterday morning, however, that Bessie understood she was pronouncing your name; and at last she made out the words, ‘Bring Jane—fetch Jane Eyre: I want to speak to her.’ Bessie is not sure whether she is in her right mind, or means anything by the words; but she told Miss Reed and Miss Georgiana, and advised them to send for you.
“My dear young lady,” I exclaimed, “I’ll stir nowhere, and hear nothing, till you have removed every article of your clothes, and put on dry things; and certainly you shall not go to Gimmerton to-night, so it is needless to order the carriage.”

“Certainly I shall,” she said; “walking or riding: yet I’ve no objection to dress myself decently.
There is something in that,” I soliloquised (mentally, be it understood; I did not talk aloud), “I know there is, because it does not sound too sweet; it is not like such words as Liberty, Excitement, Enjoyment: delightful sounds truly; but no more than sounds for me; and so hollow and fleeting that it is mere waste of time to listen to them.
Your eyebrows have become as thick as my finger, and your forehead resembles what, in some very astonishing poetry, I once saw styled, ‘a blue-piled thunderloft.’ That will be your married look, sir, I suppose?”

“If that will be your married look, I, as a Christian, will soon give up the notion of consorting with a mere sprite or salamander.
Only this morning, I received intelligence that the successor, whose arrival I have been so long expecting, cannot be ready to replace me for three months to come yet; and perhaps the three months may extend to six.”

“You tremble and become flushed whenever Miss Oliver enters the schoolroom.”

Again the surprised expression crossed his face.
The contents of the pan began to boil, and he turned to plunge his hand into the bowl; I conjectured that this preparation was probably for our supper, and, being hungry, I resolved it should be eatable; so, crying out sharply, “I’ll make the porridge!” I removed the vessel out of his reach, and proceeded to take off my hat and riding-habit.
Yet, when this cherished volume was now placed in my hand—when I turned over its leaves, and sought in its marvellous pictures the charm I had, till now, never failed to find—all was eerie and dreary; the giants were gaunt goblins, the pigmies malevolent and fearful imps, Gulliver a most desolate wanderer in most dread and dangerous regions.
To me you seem very good.”

“Then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: I am, as Miss Scatcherd said, slatternly; I seldom put, and never keep, things in order; I am careless; I forget rules; I read when I should learn my lessons; I have no method; and sometimes I say, like you, I cannot bear to be subjected to systematic arrangements.
One evening, in the beginning of June, I had stayed out very late with Mary Ann in the wood; we had, as usual, separated ourselves from the others, and had wandered far; so far that we lost our way, and had to ask it at a lonely cottage, where a man and woman lived, who looked after a herd of half-wild swine that fed on the mast in the wood.
It might be two hours later, probably near eleven, when I—not having been able to fall asleep, and deeming, from the perfect silence of the dormitory, that my companions were all wrapt in profound repose—rose softly, put on my frock over my night-dress, and, without shoes, crept from the apartment, and set off in quest of Miss Temple’s room.
“If J.E., who advertised in the ——shire Herald of last Thursday, possesses the acquirements mentioned, and if she is in a position to give satisfactory references as to character and competency, a situation can be offered her where there is but one pupil, a little girl, under ten years of age; and where the salary is thirty pounds per annum.
I see genuine contentment in your gait and mien, your eye and face, when you are helping me and pleasing me—working for me, and with me, in, as you characteristically say, ‘all that is right:’ for if I bid you do what you thought wrong, there would be no light-footed running, no neat-handed alacrity, no lively glance and animated complexion.
Adèle must go to school; and you, Miss Eyre, must get a new situation.”

“Yes, sir, I will advertise immediately: and meantime, I suppose—” I was going to say, “I suppose I may stay here, till I find another shelter to betake myself to:” but I stopped, feeling it would not do to risk a long sentence, for my voice was not quite under command.
Two young, graceful women—ladies in every point—sat, one in a low rocking-chair, the other on a lower stool; both wore deep mourning of crape and bombazeen, which sombre garb singularly set off very fair necks and faces: a large old pointer dog rested its massive head on the knee of one girl—in the lap of the other was cushioned a black cat.
Mr. Nasmyth, came between me and Miss Temple: I saw her in her travelling dress step into a post-chaise, shortly after the marriage ceremony; I watched the chaise mount the hill and disappear beyond its brow; and then retired to my own room, and there spent in solitude the greatest part of the half-holiday granted in honour of the occasion.
Bending over the balcony, I was about to murmur ‘Mon ange’—in a tone, of course, which should be audible to the ear of love alone—when a figure jumped from the carriage after her; cloaked also; but that was a spurred heel which had rung on the pavement, and that was a hatted head which now passed under the arched porte cochère of the hotel.
The thought of Mrs. O’Gall and Bitternutt Lodge struck cold to my heart; and colder the thought of all the brine and foam, destined, as it seemed, to rush between me and the master at whose side I now walked, and coldest the remembrance of the wider ocean—wealth, caste, custom intervened between me and what I naturally and inevitably loved.
Your mind is my treasure, and if it were broken, it would be my treasure still: if you raved, my arms should confine you, and not a strait waistcoat—your grasp, even in fury, would have a charm for me: if you flew at me as wildly as that woman did this morning, I should receive you in an embrace, at least as fond as it would be restrictive.
“Yes, Hannah—a far larger country than England, where they talk in no other way.”

“Well, for sure case, I knawn’t how they can understand t’ one t’other: and if either o’ ye went there, ye could tell what they said, I guess?”

“We could probably tell something of what they said, but not all—for we are not as clever as you think us, Hannah.
We don’t speak German, and we cannot read it without a dictionary to help us.”

“And what good does it do you?”

“We mean to teach it some time—or at least the elements, as they say; and then we shall get more money than we do now.”

“Varry like: but give ower studying; ye’ve done enough for to-night.”

“I think we have: at least I’m tired.
He sends his love, ma’am, and his wishes for your happiness, and his pardon for the grief you have occasioned; but he thinks that after this time his household and the household here should drop intercommunication, as nothing could come of keeping it up.”

Mrs. Heathcliff’s lip quivered slightly, and she returned to her seat in the window.
Turning at the door, my judge said—

“Let her stand half-an-hour longer on that stool, and let no one speak to her during the remainder of the day.”

There was I, then, mounted aloft; I, who had said I could not bear the shame of standing on my natural feet in the middle of the room, was now exposed to general view on a pedestal of infamy.
“My things were indeed in shameful disorder,” murmured Helen to me, in a low voice: “I intended to have arranged them, but I forgot.”

Next morning, Miss Scatcherd wrote in conspicuous characters on a piece of pasteboard the word “Slattern,” and bound it like a phylactery round Helen’s large, mild, intelligent, and benign-looking forehead.
This, par parenthèse, will be thought cool language by persons who entertain solemn doctrines about the angelic nature of children, and the duty of those charged with their education to conceive for them an idolatrous devotion: but I am not writing to flatter parental egotism, to echo cant, or prop up humbug; I am merely telling the truth.
I had set out from Whitcross on a Tuesday afternoon, and early on the succeeding Thursday morning the coach stopped to water the horses at a wayside inn, situated in the midst of scenery whose green hedges and large fields and low pastoral hills (how mild of feature and verdant of hue compared with the stern North-Midland moors of Morton!)
The pettishness that might be caressed into fondness, had yielded to a listless apathy; there was less of the peevish temper of a child which frets and teases on purpose to be soothed, and more of the self-absorbed moroseness of a confirmed invalid, repelling consolation, and ready to regard the good-humoured mirth of others as an insult.
“But I think,” said Cathy, “you’d be more comfortable at home than sitting here; and I cannot amuse you to-day, I see, by my tales, and songs, and chatter: you have grown wiser than I, in these six months; you have little taste for my diversions now: or else, if I could amuse you, I’d willingly stay.”

“Stay to rest yourself,” he replied.
“That is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since,” said he, “and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains, and for the look you had in your eyes two minutes since, you rat!”

Accustomed to John Reed’s abuse, I never had an idea of replying to it; my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly follow the insult.
No, young lady, I am not a general philanthropist; but I bear a conscience;” and he pointed to the prominences which are said to indicate that faculty, and which, fortunately for him, were sufficiently conspicuous; giving, indeed, a marked breadth to the upper part of his head: “and, besides, I once had a kind of rude tenderness of heart.
And you see, for such a large house, there are very few servants, because master has never lived here much; and when he does come, being a bachelor, he needs little waiting on: but I always think it best to err on the safe side; a door is soon fastened, and it is as well to have a drawn bolt between one and any mischief that may be about.
The little house there behind you is dark and empty.”

“I have hardly had time yet to enjoy a sense of tranquillity, much less to grow impatient under one of loneliness.”

“Very well; I hope you feel the content you express: at any rate, your good sense will tell you that it is too soon yet to yield to the vacillating fears of Lot’s wife.
My master hesitated not a moment in complying with her request: reluctant as he was to leave home at ordinary calls, he flew to answer this; commanding Catherine to my peculiar vigilance, in his absence, with reiterated orders that she must not wander out of the park, even under my escort: he did not calculate on her going unaccompanied.
CHAPTER XXI
We had sad work with little Cathy that day: she rose in high glee, eager to join her cousin, and such passionate tears and lamentations followed the news of his departure that Edgar himself was obliged to soothe her, by affirming he should come back soon: he added, however, “if I can get him”; and there were no hopes of that.
She came and shook hands with me when she heard that I was her governess; and as I led her in to breakfast, I addressed some phrases to her in her own tongue: she replied briefly at first, but after we were seated at the table, and she had examined me some ten minutes with her large hazel eyes, she suddenly commenced chattering fluently.
Of late I had often recalled this saying and this incident; for during the past week scarcely a night had gone over my couch that had not brought with it a dream of an infant, which I sometimes hushed in my arms, sometimes dandled on my knee, sometimes watched playing with daisies on a lawn, or again, dabbling its hands in running water.
“I did say so; and it is the name by which I think it expedient to be called at present, but it is not my real name, and when I hear it, it sounds strange to me.”

“Your real name you will not give?”

“No: I fear discovery above all things; and whatever disclosure would lead to it, I avoid.”

“You are quite right, I am sure,” said Diana.
All the melody on earth is concentrated in my Jane’s tongue to my ear (I am glad it is not naturally a silent one): all the sunshine I can feel is in her presence.”

The water stood in my eyes to hear this avowal of his dependence; just as if a royal eagle, chained to a perch, should be forced to entreat a sparrow to become its purveyor.
“And what if she should have slipped in clambering among them,” I reflected, “and been killed, or broken some of her bones?” My suspense was truly painful; and, at first, it gave me delightful relief to observe, in hurrying by the farmhouse, Charlie, the fiercest of the pointers, lying under a window, with swelled head and bleeding ear.
She sometimes came into the kitchen all wildered like, and looked as if she would fain beg assistance; but I was not going to disobey the master: I never dare disobey him, Mrs. Dean; and, though I thought it wrong that Kenneth should not be sent for, it was no concern of mine either to advise or complain, and I always refused to meddle.
The moment Miss Scatcherd withdrew after afternoon school, I ran to Helen, tore it off, and thrust it into the fire: the fury of which she was incapable had been burning in my soul all day, and tears, hot and large, had continually been scalding my cheek; for the spectacle of her sad resignation gave me an intolerable pain at the heart.
The carriage stopped, as I had expected, at the hotel door; my flame (that is the very word for an opera inamorata) alighted: though muffed in a cloak—an unnecessary encumbrance, by-the-bye, on so warm a June evening—I knew her instantly by her little foot, seen peeping from the skirt of her dress, as she skipped from the carriage-step.
You should hear mama on the chapter of governesses: Mary and I have had, I should think, a dozen at least in our day; half of them detestable and the rest ridiculous, and all incubi—were they not, mama?”

“Did you speak, my own?”

The young lady thus claimed as the dowager’s special property, reiterated her question with an explanation.
I think those day visions were not dark: there was a pleasurable illumination in your eye occasionally, a soft excitement in your aspect, which told of no bitter, bilious, hypochondriac brooding: your look revealed rather the sweet musings of youth when its spirit follows on willing wings the flight of Hope up and on to an ideal heaven.
It was well he did, for the whole hill-back was one billowy, white ocean; the swells and falls not indicating corresponding rises and depressions in the ground: many pits, at least, were filled to a level; and entire ranges of mounds, the refuse of the quarries, blotted from the chart which my yesterday’s walk left pictured in my mind.
Mr. Linton and his daughter would frequently walk out among the reapers; at the carrying of the last sheaves they stayed till dusk, and the evening happening to be chill and damp, my master caught a bad cold, that settled obstinately on his lungs, and confined him indoors throughout the whole of the winter, nearly without intermission.
For one thing, she was forbidden to move out of the garden, and it fretted her sadly to be confined to its narrow bounds as spring drew on; for another, in following the house, I was forced to quit her frequently, and she complained of loneliness: she preferred quarrelling with Joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her solitude.
no delay could be admitted; Miss Temple embraced us both, saying, as she drew us to her heart—

“God bless you, my children!”

Helen she held a little longer than me: she let her go more reluctantly; it was Helen her eye followed to the door; it was for her she a second time breathed a sad sigh; for her she wiped a tear from her cheek.
When I turned from it and repassed the trap-door, I could scarcely see my way down the ladder; the attic seemed black as a vault compared with that arch of blue air to which I had been looking up, and to that sunlit scene of grove, pasture, and green hill, of which the hall was the centre, and over which I had been gazing with delight.
And that pretty girl-widow, I should like to know her history: whether she be a native of the country, or, as is more probable, an exotic that the surly indigenae will not recognise for kin.” With this intention I asked Mrs. Dean why Heathcliff let Thrushcross Grange, and preferred living in a situation and residence so much inferior.
I suppose, because it is his ordinary talk you think nothing of it: you are habituated to his baseness, and, perhaps, imagine I can get used to it too!”

“Have you been listening at the door, Edgar?” asked the mistress, in a tone particularly calculated to provoke her husband, implying both carelessness and contempt of his irritation.
CHAPTER XIV
As soon as I had perused this epistle I went to the master, and informed him that his sister had arrived at the Heights, and sent me a letter expressing her sorrow for Mrs. Linton’s situation, and her ardent desire to see him; with a wish that he would transmit to her, as early as possible, some token of forgiveness by me.
In each of the sisters there was one trait of the mother—and only one; the thin and pallid elder daughter had her parent’s Cairngorm eye: the blooming and luxuriant younger girl had her contour of jaw and chin—perhaps a little softened, but still imparting an indescribable hardness to the countenance otherwise so voluptuous and buxom.
That was only a lady-clock, child, ‘flying away home.’ I wish to remind you that it was you who first said to me, with that discretion I respect in you—with that foresight, prudence, and humility which befit your responsible and dependent position—that in case I married Miss Ingram, both you and little Adèle had better trot forthwith.
I slept two nights in the open air, and wandered about two days without crossing a threshold: but twice in that space of time did I taste food; and it was when brought by hunger, exhaustion, and despair almost to the last gasp, that you, Mr. Rivers, forbade me to perish of want at your door, and took me under the shelter of your roof.
Let the reader add, to complete the picture, refined features; a complexion, if pale, clear; and a stately air and carriage, and he will have, at least, as clearly as words can give it, a correct idea of the exterior of Miss Temple—Maria Temple, as I afterwards saw the name written in a prayer-book intrusted to me to carry to church.
It was the strain of a forsaken lady, who, after bewailing the perfidy of her lover, calls pride to her aid; desires her attendant to deck her in her brightest jewels and richest robes, and resolves to meet the false one that night at a ball, and prove to him, by the gaiety of her demeanour, how little his desertion has affected her.
“Lingerer!” he said, “my brain is on fire with impatience, and you tarry so long!”

He took me into the dining-room, surveyed me keenly all over, pronounced me “fair as a lily, and not only the pride of his life, but the desire of his eyes,” and then telling me he would give me but ten minutes to eat some breakfast, he rang the bell.
Can you tell when there is a good fire?”

“Yes; with the right eye I see a glow—a ruddy haze.”

“And you see the candles?”

“Very dimly—each is a luminous cloud.”

“Can you see me?”

“No, my fairy: but I am only too thankful to hear and feel you.”

“When do you take supper?”

“I never take supper.”

“But you shall have some to-night.
After playing lady’s-maid to the new-comer, and putting my cakes in the oven, and making the house and kitchen cheerful with great fires, befitting Christmas-eve, I prepared to sit down and amuse myself by singing carols, all alone; regardless of Joseph’s affirmations that he considered the merry tunes I chose as next door to songs.
She got downstairs before me, and out into the garden, where she had seen her cousin performing some easy work; and when I went to bid them come to breakfast, I saw she had persuaded him to clear a large space of ground from currant and gooseberry bushes, and they were busy planning together an importation of plants from the Grange.
My second daughter, Augusta, went with her mama to visit the school, and on her return she exclaimed: ‘Oh, dear papa, how quiet and plain all the girls at Lowood look, with their hair combed behind their ears, and their long pinafores, and those little holland pockets outside their frocks—they are almost like poor people’s children!
I was not reprimanded for leaving my bed; people had something else to think about; no explanation was afforded then to my many questions; but a day or two afterwards I learned that Miss Temple, on returning to her own room at dawn, had found me laid in the little crib; my face against Helen Burns’s shoulder, my arms round her neck.
and Pilot was with him:—what has he done with the animals?”

As she said this, she approached her tall person and ample garments so near the window, that I was obliged to bend back almost to the breaking of my spine: in her eagerness she did not observe me at first, but when she did, she curled her lip and moved to another casement.
The fact was, I had other things to think about; within the last few months feelings had been stirred in me so much more potent than any they could raise—pains and pleasures so much more acute and exquisite had been excited than any it was in their power to inflict or bestow—that their airs gave me no concern either for good or bad.
Anything more exquisite than her appearance, in her purple habit, with her Amazon’s cap of black velvet placed gracefully above the long curls that kissed her cheek and floated to her shoulders, can scarcely be imagined: and it was thus she would enter the rustic building, and glide through the dazzled ranks of the village children.
He’ll be cramming his fingers in the tarts and stealing the fruit, if left alone with them a minute.”

“Nay, sir,” I could not avoid answering, “he’ll touch nothing, not he: and I suppose he must have his share of the dainties as well as we.”

“He shall have his share of my hand, if I catch him downstairs till dark,” cried Hindley.
Hareton Earnshaw—that is, Miss Cathy’s other cousin, and so yours in a manner—will show you all the sweetest spots; and you can bring a book in fine weather, and make a green hollow your study; and, now and then, your uncle may join you in a walk: he does, frequently, walk out on the hills.”

“And what is my father like?” he asked.
Surely the Mary Ann Wilson I have mentioned was inferior to my first acquaintance: she could only tell me amusing stories, and reciprocate any racy and pungent gossip I chose to indulge in; while, if I have spoken truth of Helen, she was qualified to give those who enjoyed the privilege of her converse a taste of far higher things.
As this horse approached, and as I watched for it to appear through the dusk, I remembered certain of Bessie’s tales, wherein figured a North-of-England spirit called a “Gytrash,” which, in the form of horse, mule, or large dog, haunted solitary ways, and sometimes came upon belated travellers, as this horse was now coming upon me.
I never could guess a riddle in my life.”

“If you wish me to speak more plainly, show me your palm.”

“And I must cross it with silver, I suppose?”

“To be sure.”

I gave her a shilling: she put it into an old stocking-foot which she took out of her pocket, and having tied it round and returned it, she told me to hold out my hand.
“After all, a single morning’s interruption will not matter much,” said he, “when I mean shortly to claim you—your thoughts, conversation, and company—for life.”

Adèle, when lifted in, commenced kissing me, by way of expressing her gratitude for my intercession: she was instantly stowed away into a corner on the other side of him.
I ask again, is there anything the matter?”

“Nothing now; I am neither afraid nor unhappy.”

“Then you have been both?”

“Rather: but I’ll tell you all about it by-and-bye, sir; and I daresay you will only laugh at me for my pains.”

“I’ll laugh at you heartily when to-morrow is past; till then I dare not: my prize is not certain.
It is excusable, for she had a hard life of it: but still it was dangerous; for when Mrs. Poole was fast asleep after the gin and water, the mad lady, who was as cunning as a witch, would take the keys out of her pocket, let herself out of her chamber, and go roaming about the house, doing any wild mischief that came into her head.
A more elastic footstep entered next; and now I opened my mouth for a “good-morning,” but closed it again, the salutation unachieved; for Hareton Earnshaw was performing his orison sotto voce, in a series of curses directed against every object he touched, while he rummaged a corner for a spade or shovel to dig through the drifts.
Then personal appearance sympathised with mental deterioration: he acquired a slouching gait and ignoble look; his naturally reserved disposition was exaggerated into an almost idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness; and he took a grim pleasure, apparently, in exciting the aversion rather than the esteem of his few acquaintances.
Be content, you always followed me!”

Perceiving it vain to argue against her insanity, I was planning how I could reach something to wrap about her, without quitting my hold of herself (for I could not trust her alone by the gaping lattice), when, to my consternation, I heard the rattle of the door-handle, and Mr. Linton entered.
When Heathcliff is in, I’m often obliged to seek the kitchen and their society, or starve among the damp uninhabited chambers; when he is not, as was the case this week, I establish a table and chair at one corner of the house fire, and never mind how Mr. Earnshaw may occupy himself; and he does not interfere with my arrangements.
In summer Miss Catherine delighted to climb along these trunks, and sit in the branches, swinging twenty feet above the ground; and I, pleased with her agility and her light, childish heart, still considered it proper to scold every time I caught her at such an elevation, but so that she knew there was no necessity for descending.
She showed a good heart, thenceforth, in avoiding both complaints and expressions of antipathy concerning Heathcliff; and confessed to me her sorrow that she had endeavoured to raise a bad spirit between him and Hareton: indeed, I don’t believe she has ever breathed a syllable, in the latter’s hearing, against her oppressor since.
I would advise her blackaviced suitor to look out: if another comes, with a longer or clearer rent-roll,—he’s dished—”

“But, mother, I did not come to hear Mr. Rochester’s fortune: I came to hear my own; and you have told me nothing of it.”

“Your fortune is yet doubtful: when I examined your face, one trait contradicted another.
Heart-weary and soul-withered, you come home after years of voluntary banishment: you make a new acquaintance—how or where no matter: you find in this stranger much of the good and bright qualities which you have sought for twenty years, and never before encountered; and they are all fresh, healthy, without soil and without taint.
“You see, sir, I am come, according to promise!” I exclaimed, assuming the cheerful; “and I fear I shall be weather-bound for half an hour, if you can afford me shelter during that space.”

“Half an hour?” he said, shaking the white flakes from his clothes; “I wonder you should select the thick of a snow-storm to ramble about in.
I thought there was something wrong as he set down the light; and seizing the children each by an arm, whispered them to “frame upstairs, and make little din—they might pray alone that evening—he had summut to do.”

“I shall bid father good-night first,” said Catherine, putting her arms round his neck, before we could hinder her.
“Make haste, Heathcliff!” I said, “the kitchen is so comfortable; and Joseph is upstairs: make haste, and let me dress you smart before Miss Cathy comes out, and then you can sit together, with the whole hearth to yourselves, and have a long chatter till bedtime.”

He proceeded with his task, and never turned his head towards me.
I never felt better.”

“Then you must prove it by evincing a good appetite; will you fill the teapot while I knit off this needle?” Having completed her task, she rose to draw down the blind, which she had hitherto kept up, by way, I suppose, of making the most of daylight, though dusk was now fast deepening into total obscurity.
Mrs. Fairfax surmised that he was gone to make arrangements for his wedding, as he had talked of purchasing a new carriage: she said the idea of his marrying Miss Ingram still seemed strange to her; but from what everybody said, and from what she had herself seen, she could no longer doubt that the event would shortly take place.
Mosquitoes came buzzing in and hummed sullenly round the room; the sea, which I could hear from thence, rumbled dull like an earthquake—black clouds were casting up over it; the moon was setting in the waves, broad and red, like a hot cannon-ball—she threw her last bloody glance over a world quivering with the ferment of tempest.
You no doubt were, at that hour, in unconscious sleep, Jane: perhaps your soul wandered from its cell to comfort mine; for those were your accents—as certain as I live—they were yours!”

Reader, it was on Monday night—near midnight—that I too had received the mysterious summons: those were the very words by which I replied to it.
“You may come and wish Miss Catherine welcome, like the other servants.”

Cathy, catching a glimpse of her friend in his concealment, flew to embrace him; she bestowed seven or eight kisses on his cheek within the second, and then stopped, and drawing back, burst into a laugh, exclaiming, “Why, how very black and cross you look!
“I certainly esteem myself a steady, reasonable kind of body,” she said; “not exactly from living among the hills and seeing one set of faces, and one series of actions, from year’s end to year’s end; but I have undergone sharp discipline, which has taught me wisdom; and then, I have read more than you would fancy, Mr. Lockwood.
Hareton was impressed with a wholesome terror of encountering either his wild beast’s fondness or his madman’s rage; for in one he ran a chance of being squeezed and kissed to death, and in the other of being flung into the fire, or dashed against the wall; and the poor thing remained perfectly quiet wherever I chose to put him.
Then take my word for it,—I am not a villain: you are not to suppose that—not to attribute to me any such bad eminence; but, owing, I verily believe, rather to circumstances than to my natural bent, I am a trite commonplace sinner, hackneyed in all the poor petty dissipations with which the rich and worthless try to put on life.
“Then, Jane, you must play the accompaniment.”

“Very well, sir, I will try.”

I did try, but was presently swept off the stool and denominated “a little bungler.” Being pushed unceremoniously to one side—which was precisely what I wished—he usurped my place, and proceeded to accompany himself: for he could play as well as sing.
At this thought, I turned my face aside from the lovely sky of eve and lonely vale of Morton—I say lonely, for in that bend of it visible to me there was no building apparent save the church and the parsonage, half-hid in trees, and, quite at the extremity, the roof of Vale Hall, where the rich Mr. Oliver and his daughter lived.
My heart invariably cleaved to the master’s, in preference to Catherine’s side: with reason I imagined, for he was kind, and trustful, and honourable; and she—she could not be called opposite, yet she seemed to allow herself such wide latitude, that I had little faith in her principles, and still less sympathy for her feelings.
“Unjust!—unjust!” said my reason, forced by the agonising stimulus into precocious though transitory power: and Resolve, equally wrought up, instigated some strange expedient to achieve escape from insupportable oppression—as running away, or, if that could not be effected, never eating or drinking more, and letting myself die.
Leaning a little back on my bench, I could see the looks and grimaces with which they commented on this manoeuvre: it was a pity Mr. Brocklehurst could not see them too; he would perhaps have felt that, whatever he might do with the outside of the cup and platter, the inside was further beyond his interference than he imagined.
I don’t know, ma’am; I’ll inquire at the bar.” He vanished, but reappeared instantly—

“Is your name Eyre, Miss?”

“Yes.”

“Person here waiting for you.”

I jumped up, took my muff and umbrella, and hastened into the inn-passage: a man was standing by the open door, and in the lamp-lit street I dimly saw a one-horse conveyance.
However, when I had brushed my hair very smooth, and put on my black frock—which, Quakerlike as it was, at least had the merit of fitting to a nicety—and adjusted my clean white tucker, I thought I should do respectably enough to appear before Mrs. Fairfax, and that my new pupil would not at least recoil from me with antipathy.
An extinguished candle stood on the table; she was bending over the fire, and seemed reading in a little black book, like a prayer-book, by the light of the blaze: she muttered the words to herself, as most old women do, while she read; she did not desist immediately on my entrance: it appeared she wished to finish a paragraph.
“Now, he has his back towards me,” thought I, “and he is occupied too; perhaps, if I walk softly, I can slip away unnoticed.”

I trode on an edging of turf that the crackle of the pebbly gravel might not betray me: he was standing among the beds at a yard or two distant from where I had to pass; the moth apparently engaged him.
I could have sat with thee till morning, Jane.”

“And so,” thought I, “could I with you.” I should have said so, perhaps, but a livid, vivid spark leapt out of a cloud at which I was looking, and there was a crack, a crash, and a close rattling peal; and I thought only of hiding my dazzled eyes against Mr. Rochester’s shoulder.
To speak truth, I had not the least wish to go into company, for in company I was very rarely noticed; and if Bessie had but been kind and companionable, I should have deemed it a treat to spend the evenings quietly with her, instead of passing them under the formidable eye of Mrs. Reed, in a room full of ladies and gentlemen.
“I always said you would surpass them in learning: and can you draw?”

“That is one of my paintings over the chimney-piece.” It was a landscape in water colours, of which I had made a present to the superintendent, in acknowledgment of her obliging mediation with the committee on my behalf, and which she had framed and glazed.
In the clear embers I was tracing a view, not unlike a picture I remembered to have seen of the castle of Heidelberg, on the Rhine, when Mrs. Fairfax came in, breaking up by her entrance the fiery mosaic I had been piercing together, and scattering too some heavy unwelcome thoughts that were beginning to throng on my solitude.
I have a rosy sky and a green flowery Eden in my brain; but without, I am perfectly aware, lies at my feet a rough tract to travel, and around me gather black tempests to encounter.’ You ran downstairs and demanded of Mrs. Fairfax some occupation: the weekly house accounts to make up, or something of that sort, I think it was.
I know all your sisters have done for me since—for I have not been insensible during my seeming torpor—and I owe to their spontaneous, genuine, genial compassion as large a debt as to your evangelical charity.”

“Don’t make her talk any more now, St. John,” said Diana, as I paused; “she is evidently not yet fit for excitement.
“That I should like to have it is certain: whether it would be judicious or wise is another question.”

Since I had ascertained that Rosamond really preferred him, and that her father was not likely to oppose the match, I—less exalted in my views than St. John—had been strongly disposed in my own heart to advocate their union.
Jane!’ a voice—I cannot tell whence the voice came, but I know whose voice it was—replied, ‘I am coming: wait for me;’ and a moment after, went whispering on the wind the words—‘Where are you?’

“I’ll tell you, if I can, the idea, the picture these words opened to my mind: yet it is difficult to express what I want to express.
He—probably swayed by prudential consideration of the folly of offending a good tenant—relaxed a little in the laconic style of chipping off his pronouns and auxiliary verbs, and introduced what he supposed would be a subject of interest to me,—a discourse on the advantages and disadvantages of my present place of retirement.
I went round by the garden, and laid wait for the messenger; who fought valorously to defend his trust, and we spilt the milk between us; but I succeeded in abstracting the epistle; and, threatening serious consequences if he did not look sharp home, I remained under the wall and perused Miss Cathy’s affectionate composition.
“And people hate their wives, sometimes; but not their sisters and brothers: and if you were the latter, you would live with us, and papa would be as fond of you as he is of me.”

Linton denied that people ever hated their wives; but Cathy affirmed they did, and, in her wisdom, instanced his own father’s aversion to her aunt.
My ostensible errand on this occasion was to get measured for a pair of shoes; so I discharged that business first, and when it was done, I stepped across the clean and quiet little street from the shoemaker’s to the post-office: it was kept by an old dame, who wore horn spectacles on her nose, and black mittens on her hands.
A soft sound of rising now became audible; the curtain was swept back from the arch; through it appeared the dining-room, with its lit lustre pouring down light on the silver and glass of a magnificent dessert-service covering a long table; a band of ladies stood in the opening; they entered, and the curtain fell behind them.
You will not speak to him on any pretext—and—Richard, it will be at the peril of your life if you speak to her: open your lips—agitate yourself—and I’ll not answer for the consequences.”

Again the poor man groaned; he looked as if he dared not move; fear, either of death or of something else, appeared almost to paralyse him.
We may, perhaps, succeed in restoring her to them, if she is not obstinate: but I trace lines of force in her face which make me sceptical of her tractability.” He stood considering me some minutes; then added, “She looks sensible, but not at all handsome.”

“She is so ill, St. John.”

“Ill or well, she would always be plain.
Are you acquainted with the mood of mind in which, if you were seated alone, and the cat licking its kitten on the rug before you, you would watch the operation so intently that puss’s neglect of one ear would put you seriously out of temper?”

“A terribly lazy mood, I should say.”

“On the contrary, a tiresomely active one.
I told the master he got rid of all decent people only to run to ruin a little faster; I kissed Hareton, said good-by; and since then he has been a stranger: and it’s very queer to think it, but I’ve no doubt he has completely forgotten all about Ellen Dean, and that he was ever more than all the world to her and she to him!
But, supposing at twelve years old I had been wrenched from the Heights, and every early association, and my all in all, as Heathcliff was at that time, and been converted at a stroke into Mrs. Linton, the lady of Thrushcross Grange, and the wife of a stranger: an exile, and outcast, thenceforth, from what had been my world.
There is a man in our own days whose words are not framed to tickle delicate ears: who, to my thinking, comes before the great ones of society, much as the son of Imlah came before the throned Kings of Judah and Israel; and who speaks truth as deep, with a power as prophet-like and as vital—a mien as dauntless and as daring.
Turning from Bessie (though her presence was far less obnoxious to me than that of Abbot, for instance, would have been), I scrutinised the face of the gentleman: I knew him; it was Mr. Lloyd, an apothecary, sometimes called in by Mrs. Reed when the servants were ailing: for herself and the children she employed a physician.
I hardly know where I found the hardihood thus to open a conversation with a stranger; the step was contrary to my nature and habits: but I think her occupation touched a chord of sympathy somewhere; for I too liked reading, though of a frivolous and childish kind; I could not digest or comprehend the serious or substantial.
I started, or rather (for like other defaulters, I like to lay half the blame on ill fortune and adverse circumstances) was thrust on to a wrong tack at the age of one-and-twenty, and have never recovered the right course since: but I might have been very different; I might have been as good as you—wiser—almost as stainless.
I could not forget your conduct to me, Jane—the fury with which you once turned on me; the tone in which you declared you abhorred me the worst of anybody in the world; the unchildlike look and voice with which you affirmed that the very thought of me made you sick, and asserted that I had treated you with miserable cruelty.
I, too, in the grey, small, antique structure, with its low roof, its latticed casements, its mouldering walls, its avenue of aged firs—all grown aslant under the stress of mountain winds; its garden, dark with yew and holly—and where no flowers but of the hardiest species would bloom—found a charm both potent and permanent.
Don’t you think so, Jane?”

“It is a pity to see it; and a pity to see your eyes—and the scar of fire on your forehead: and the worst of it is, one is in danger of loving you too well for all this; and making too much of you.”

“I thought you would be revolted, Jane, when you saw my arm, and my cicatrised visage.”

“Did you?
Mary did look up, and she did stare at me: the ladle with which she was basting a pair of chickens roasting at the fire, did for some three minutes hang suspended in air; and for the same space of time John’s knives also had rest from the polishing process: but Mary, bending again over the roast, said only—

“Have you, Miss?
“It was no hint that your company was superfluous: we didn’t care whether you kept with us or not; I merely thought Heathcliff’s talk would have nothing entertaining for your ears.”

“Oh, no,” wept the young lady; “you wished me away, because you knew I liked to be there!”

“Is she sane?” asked Mrs. Linton, appealing to me.
“She drew a sigh, and stretched herself, like a child reviving, and sinking again to sleep; and five minutes after I felt one little pulse at her heart, and nothing more!”

“And—did she ever mention me?” he asked, hesitating, as if he dreaded the answer to his question would introduce details that he could not bear to hear.
At that hour most of the others were sewing likewise; but one class still stood round Miss Scatcherd’s chair reading, and as all was quiet, the subject of their lessons could be heard, together with the manner in which each girl acquitted herself, and the animadversions or commendations of Miss Scatcherd on the performance.
That last fit of coughing has tired me a little; I feel as if I could sleep: but don’t leave me, Jane; I like to have you near me.”

“I’ll stay with you, dear Helen: no one shall take me away.”

“Are you warm, darling?”

“Yes.”

“Good-night, Jane.”

“Good-night, Helen.”

She kissed me, and I her, and we both soon slumbered.
“And, Miss Eyre, so much was I flattered by this preference of the Gallic sylph for her British gnome, that I installed her in an hotel; gave her a complete establishment of servants, a carriage, cashmeres, diamonds, dentelles, &c. In short, I began the process of ruining myself in the received style, like any other spoony.
There is no debt, benefit, burden, obligation, in the case.”

“I knew,” he continued, “you would do me good in some way, at some time;—I saw it in your eyes when I first beheld you: their expression and smile did not”—(again he stopped)—“did not” (he proceeded hastily) “strike delight to my very inmost heart so for nothing.
“Yes; and when they go, I shall return to the parsonage at Morton: Hannah will accompany me; and this old house will be shut up.”

I waited a few moments, expecting he would go on with the subject first broached: but he seemed to have entered another train of reflection: his look denoted abstraction from me and my business.
The reader believed his name was already written in the Lamb’s book of life, and he yearned after the hour which should admit him to the city to which the kings of the earth bring their glory and honour; which has no need of sun or moon to shine in it, because the glory of God lightens it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.
You have a ‘faux air’ of Nebuchadnezzar in the fields about you, that is certain: your hair reminds me of eagles’ feathers; whether your nails are grown like birds’ claws or not, I have not yet noticed.”

“On this arm, I have neither hand nor nails,” he said, drawing the mutilated limb from his breast, and showing it to me.
“Where is the use of doing me good in any way, beneficent spirit, when, at some fatal moment, you will again desert me—passing like a shadow, whither and how to me unknown, and for me remaining afterwards undiscoverable?”

“Have you a pocket-comb about you, sir?”

“What for, Jane?”

“Just to comb out this shaggy black mane.
“I telled Mary how it would be,” he said: “I knew what Mr. Edward” (John was an old servant, and had known his master when he was the cadet of the house, therefore, he often gave him his Christian name)—“I knew what Mr. Edward would do; and I was certain he would not wait long neither: and he’s done right, for aught I know.
Hereafter she is only my sister in name: not because I disown her, but because she has disowned me.”

And that was all he said on the subject: he did not make single inquiry further, or mention her in any way, except directing me to send what property she had in the house to her fresh home, wherever it was, when I knew it.
And as he had been in the habit of accusing Catherine Earnshaw and Heathcliff, when children, of putting the master past his patience, and compelling him to seek solace in drink by what he termed their “offald ways,” so at present he laid the whole burden of Hareton’s faults on the shoulders of the usurper of his property.
My world had for some years been in Lowood: my experience had been of its rules and systems; now I remembered that the real world was wide, and that a varied field of hopes and fears, of sensations and excitements, awaited those who had courage to go forth into its expanse, to seek real knowledge of life amidst its perils.
I acknowledged no natural claim on Adèle’s part to be supported by me, nor do I now acknowledge any, for I am not her father; but hearing that she was quite destitute, I e’en took the poor thing out of the slime and mud of Paris, and transplanted it here, to grow up clean in the wholesome soil of an English country garden.
I am no beggar; any more than yourself or your young ladies.”

After a pause she said, “I dunnut understand that: you’ve like no house, nor no brass, I guess?”

“The want of house or brass (by which I suppose you mean money) does not make a beggar in your sense of the word.”

“Are you book-learned?” she inquired presently.
I was vain of his commendations, and softened towards the being by whose means I earned them, and thus Hindley lost his last ally: still I couldn’t dote on Heathcliff, and I wondered often what my master saw to admire so much in the sullen boy; who never, to my recollection, repaid his indulgence by any sign of gratitude.
“And I should delight to look round me from the brow of that tallest point: my little pony Minny shall take me some time.”

One of the maids mentioning the Fairy Cave, quite turned her head with a desire to fulfil this project: she teased Mr. Linton about it; and he promised she should have the journey when she got older.
But I shall not return till this time next week; and I think your master himself would scarcely object to her visiting her cousin.”

“Come in,” said I, taking Cathy by the arm and half forcing her to re-enter; for she lingered, viewing with troubled eyes the features of the speaker, too stern to express his inward deceit.
I wish the woollen stockings were better looked to!—when I was here last, I went into the kitchen-garden and examined the clothes drying on the line; there was a quantity of black hose in a very bad state of repair: from the size of the holes in them I was sure they had not been well mended from time to time.”

He paused.
“I came on purpose to find you, Jane Eyre,” said she; “I want you in my room; and as Helen Burns is with you, she may come too.”

We went; following the superintendent’s guidance, we had to thread some intricate passages, and mount a staircase before we reached her apartment; it contained a good fire, and looked cheerful.
It was a fine, calm day, though very cold; I was tired of sitting still in the library through a whole long morning: Mrs. Fairfax had just written a letter which was waiting to be posted, so I put on my bonnet and cloak and volunteered to carry it to Hay; the distance, two miles, would be a pleasant winter afternoon walk.
Give me five pounds, Jane.”

“Not five shillings, sir; nor five pence.”

“Just let me look at the cash.”

“No, sir; you are not to be trusted.”

“Jane!”

“Sir?”

“Promise me one thing.”

“I’ll promise you anything, sir, that I think I am likely to perform.”

“Not to advertise: and to trust this quest of a situation to me.
Georgiana added to her “How d’ye do?” several commonplaces about my journey, the weather, and so on, uttered in rather a drawling tone: and accompanied by sundry side-glances that measured me from head to foot—now traversing the folds of my drab merino pelisse, and now lingering on the plain trimming of my cottage bonnet.
Come on, if you please.”

I suppose I do come on; though in what fashion I know not; being scarcely cognisant of my movements, and solicitous only to appear calm; and, above all, to control the working muscles of my face—which I feel rebel insolently against my will, and struggle to express what I had resolved to conceal.
“Listen, Diana,” said one of the absorbed students; “Franz and old Daniel are together in the night-time, and Franz is telling a dream from which he has awakened in terror—listen!” And in a low voice she read something, of which not one word was intelligible to me; for it was in an unknown tongue—neither French nor Latin.
Hannah entered with the intimation that “a poor lad was come, at that unlikely time, to fetch Mr. Rivers to see his mother, who was drawing away.”

“Where does she live, Hannah?”

“Clear up at Whitcross Brow, almost four miles off, and moor and moss all the way.”

“Tell him I will go.”

“I’m sure, sir, you had better not.
She stepped behind me and whispered crossly, “Take yourself and your dusters off; when company are in the house, servants don’t commence scouring and cleaning in the room where they are!”

“It’s a good opportunity, now that master is away,” I answered aloud: “he hates me to be fidgeting over these things in his presence.
I am curious to hear it.”

“You have as good as informed me, sir, that you are going shortly to be married?”

“Yes; what then?”

“In that case, sir, Adèle ought to go to school: I am sure you will perceive the necessity of it.”

“To get her out of my bride’s way, who might otherwise walk over her rather too emphatically?
“The vocation will fit you to a hair,” I thought: “much good may it do you!”

When we parted, she said: “Good-bye, cousin Jane Eyre; I wish you well: you have some sense.”

I then returned: “You are not without sense, cousin Eliza; but what you have, I suppose, in another year will be walled up alive in a French convent.
I have a woman’s heart, but not where you are concerned; for you I have only a comrade’s constancy; a fellow-soldier’s frankness, fidelity, fraternity, if you like; a neophyte’s respect and submission to his hierophant: nothing more—don’t fear.”

“It is what I want,” he said, speaking to himself; “it is just what I want.
Can you tell me that?”

“A pit full of fire.”

“And should you like to fall into that pit, and to be burning there for ever?”

“No, sir.”

“What must you do to avoid it?”

I deliberated a moment; my answer, when it did come, was objectionable: “I must keep in good health, and not die.”

“How can you keep in good health?
I stood and warmed my numbed fingers over the blaze, then I looked round; there was no candle, but the uncertain light from the hearth showed, by intervals, papered walls, carpet, curtains, shining mahogany furniture: it was a parlour, not so spacious or splendid as the drawing-room at Gateshead, but comfortable enough.
I discovered, too, that a great pleasure, an enjoyment which the horizon only bounded, lay all outside the high and spike-guarded walls of our garden: this pleasure consisted in prospect of noble summits girdling a great hill-hollow, rich in verdure and shadow; in a bright beck, full of dark stones and sparkling eddies.
I really did not expect any Grace to answer; for the laugh was as tragic, as preternatural a laugh as any I ever heard; and, but that it was high noon, and that no circumstance of ghostliness accompanied the curious cachinnation; but that neither scene nor season favoured fear, I should have been superstitiously afraid.
“Thank you; now make haste with the letter to Hay, and return as fast as you can.”

A touch of a spurred heel made his horse first start and rear, and then bound away; the dog rushed in his traces; all three vanished,

“Like heath that, in the wilderness,
    The wild wind whirls away.”

I took up my muff and walked on.
Three women were got to help; and such scrubbing, such brushing, such washing of paint and beating of carpets, such taking down and putting up of pictures, such polishing of mirrors and lustres, such lighting of fires in bedrooms, such airing of sheets and feather-beds on hearths, I never beheld, either before or since.
I listened long: suddenly I discovered that my ear was wholly intent on analysing the mingled sounds, and trying to discriminate amidst the confusion of accents those of Mr. Rochester; and when it caught them, which it soon did, it found a further task in framing the tones, rendered by distance inarticulate, into words.
Teach me; I’m not quite up to it.”

“They say, Farewell, or any other form they prefer.”

“Then say it.”

“Farewell, Mr. Rochester, for the present.”

“What must I say?”

“The same, if you like, sir.”

“Farewell, Miss Eyre, for the present; is that all?”

“Yes.”

“It seems stingy, to my notions, and dry, and unfriendly.
In seeking the door, I turned an angle: there shot out the friendly gleam again, from the lozenged panes of a very small latticed window, within a foot of the ground, made still smaller by the growth of ivy or some other creeping plant, whose leaves clustered thick over the portion of the house wall in which it was set.
“You would not like to be long dependent on our hospitality—you would wish, I see, to dispense as soon as may be with my sisters’ compassion, and, above all, with my charity (I am quite sensible of the distinction drawn, nor do I resent it—it is just): you desire to be independent of us?”

“I do: I have already said so.
I burnt for the more active life of the world—for the more exciting toils of a literary career—for the destiny of an artist, author, orator; anything rather than that of a priest: yes, the heart of a politician, of a soldier, of a votary of glory, a lover of renown, a luster after power, beat under my curate’s surplice.
He would not cross the door-stones of the house, except at night, when he walked just like a ghost about the grounds and in the orchard as if he had lost his senses—which it is my opinion he had; for a more spirited, bolder, keener gentleman than he was before that midge of a governess crossed him, you never saw, ma’am.
It is strange people should be so greedy, when they are alone in the world!”

“He had a son, it seems?”

“Yes, he had one—he is dead.”

“And that young lady, Mrs. Heathcliff, is his widow?”

“Yes.”

“Where did she come from originally?”

“Why, sir, she is my late master’s daughter: Catherine Linton was her maiden name.
A high wind blustered round the house, and roared in the chimney: it sounded wild and stormy, yet it was not cold, and we were all together—I, a little removed from the hearth, busy at my knitting, and Joseph reading his Bible near the table (for the servants generally sat in the house then, after their work was done).
While untying the knot round the hook, it seemed to me that I repeatedly caught the beat of horses’ feet galloping at some distance; but there were such a number of things to occupy my reflections that I hardly gave the circumstance a thought: though it was a strange sound, in that place, at two o’clock in the morning.
You inquire after my health—it is better; but while I remain cut off from all hope, and doomed to solitude, or the society of those who never did and never will like me, how can I be cheerful and well?”

Edgar, though he felt for the boy, could not consent to grant his request; because he could not accompany Catherine.
Mary had a milder and more open countenance than Blanche; softer features too, and a skin some shades fairer (Miss Ingram was dark as a Spaniard)—but Mary was deficient in life: her face lacked expression, her eye lustre; she had nothing to say, and having once taken her seat, remained fixed like a statue in its niche.
“I don’t doubt it.”

The question followed, “Where was I to go?” I dreamt of Miss Ingram all the night: in a vivid morning dream I saw her closing the gates of Thornfield against me and pointing me out another road; and Mr. Rochester looked on with his arms folded—smiling sardonically, as it seemed, at both her and me.
My father always cherished the idea that he would atone for his error by leaving his possessions to us; that letter informs us that he has bequeathed every penny to the other relation, with the exception of thirty guineas, to be divided between St. John, Diana, and Mary Rivers, for the purchase of three mourning rings.
Earnshaw, the old master, came downstairs, dressed for a journey; and, after he had told Joseph what was to be done during the day, he turned to Hindley, and Cathy, and me—for I sat eating my porridge with them—and he said, speaking to his son, “Now, my bonny man, I’m going to Liverpool to-day, what shall I bring you?
The unhealthy nature of the site; the quantity and quality of the children’s food; the brackish, fetid water used in its preparation; the pupils’ wretched clothing and accommodations—all these things were discovered, and the discovery produced a result mortifying to Mr. Brocklehurst, but beneficial to the institution.
Arrows that continually glanced off from Mr. Rochester’s breast and fell harmless at his feet, might, I knew, if shot by a surer hand, have quivered keen in his proud heart—have called love into his stern eye, and softness into his sardonic face; or, better still, without weapons a silent conquest might have been won.
“Rosamond Oliver,” said he, “is about to be married to Mr. Granby, one of the best connected and most estimable residents in S——, grandson and heir to Sir Frederic Granby: I had the intelligence from her father yesterday.”

His sisters looked at each other and at me; we all three looked at him: he was serene as glass.
Are they relations?”

“No; he is the late Mrs. Linton’s nephew.”

“The young lady’s cousin, then?”

“Yes; and her husband was her cousin also: one on the mother’s, the other on the father’s side: Heathcliff married Mr. Linton’s sister.”

“I see the house at Wuthering Heights has ‘Earnshaw’ carved over the front door.
“I shall be as dirty as I please: and I like to be dirty, and I will be dirty.”

With that he dashed headforemost out of the room, amid the merriment of the master and mistress, and to the serious disturbance of Catherine; who could not comprehend how her remarks should have produced such an exhibition of bad temper.
One state resembles setting a hungry man down to a single dish, on which he may concentrate his entire appetite and do it justice; the other, introducing him to a table laid out by French cooks: he can perhaps extract as much enjoyment from the whole; but each part is a mere atom in his regard and remembrance.”

“Oh!
Is it not sufficient for your infernal selfishness, that while you are at peace I shall writhe in the torments of hell?”

“I shall not be at peace,” moaned Catherine, recalled to a sense of physical weakness by the violent, unequal throbbing of her heart, which beat visibly and audibly under this excess of agitation.
He opened them suddenly, and resigned the object of dispute; but, ere she had well secured it, he seized her with the liberated hand, and, pulling her on his knee, administered with the other a shower of terrific slaps on both sides of the head, each sufficient to have fulfilled his threat, had she been able to fall.
She’s as poor as you or I: poorer, I’ll be bound: you’re saying, and I’m doing my little all that road.”

Hareton allowed Zillah to give him her aid; and she flattered him into a good humour; so, when Catherine came, half forgetting her former insults, he tried to make himself agreeable, by the housekeeper’s account.
But I tell you—and you may mark my words—you will come some day to a craggy pass in the channel, where the whole of life’s stream will be broken up into whirl and tumult, foam and noise: either you will be dashed to atoms on crag points, or lifted up and borne on by some master-wave into a calmer current—as I am now.
In truth it was humble—but then it was sheltered, and I wanted a safe asylum: it was plodding—but then, compared with that of a governess in a rich house, it was independent; and the fear of servitude with strangers entered my soul like iron: it was not ignoble—not unworthy—not mentally degrading, I made my decision.
I witnessed, and several more witnessed, Mr. Rochester ascend through the sky-light on to the roof; we heard him call ‘Bertha!’ We saw him approach her; and then, ma’am, she yelled and gave a spring, and the next minute she lay smashed on the pavement.”

The next minute she lay smashed on the pavement
“Dead?”

“Dead!
Bud yah’re a nowt, and it’s no use talking—yah’ll niver mend o’yer ill ways, but goa raight to t’ divil, like yer mother afore ye!”

I imagined, for a moment, that this piece of eloquence was addressed to me; and, sufficiently enraged, stepped towards the aged rascal with an intention of kicking him out of the door.
“You’re hard to please; so many friends and so few cares, and can’t make yourself content!”

“Nelly, will you keep a secret for me?” she pursued, kneeling down by me, and lifting her winsome eyes to my face with that sort of look which turns off bad temper, even when one has all the right in the world to indulge it.
If all else perished, and he remained, I should still continue to be; and if all else remained, and he were annihilated, the universe would turn to a mighty stranger: I should not seem a part of it.—My love for Linton is like the foliage in the woods: time will change it, I’m well aware, as winter changes the trees.
Next spring you’ll long again to have me under this roof, and you’ll look back and think you were happy to-day.”

Linton lavished on her the kindest caresses, and tried to cheer her by the fondest words; but, vaguely regarding the flowers, she let the tears collect on her lashes and stream down her cheeks unheeding.
Do try to behave like a gentleman, now do!”

“If thou weren’t more a lass than a lad, I’d fell thee this minute, I would; pitiful lath of a crater!” retorted the angry boor, retreating, while his face burnt with mingled rage and mortification; for he was conscious of being insulted, and embarrassed how to resent it.
Hareton says he wakes and shrieks in the night by the hour together, and calls you to protect him from me; and, whether you like your precious mate, or not, you must come: he’s your concern now; I yield all my interest in him to you.”

“Why not let Catherine continue here,” I pleaded, “and send Master Linton to her?
I was glad of it: I never liked long walks, especially on chilly afternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight, with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidings of Bessie, the nurse, and humbled by the consciousness of my physical inferiority to Eliza, John, and Georgiana Reed.
Having given some further directions, and intimated that he should call again the next day, he departed; to my grief: I felt so sheltered and befriended while he sat in the chair near my pillow; and as he closed the door after him, all the room darkened and my heart again sank: inexpressible sadness weighed it down.
A distant bell tinkled: immediately three ladies entered the room, each walked to a table and took her seat; Miss Miller assumed the fourth vacant chair, which was that nearest the door, and around which the smallest of the children were assembled: to this inferior class I was called, and placed at the bottom of it.
Presently the whole chapel resounded with rappings and counter rappings: every man’s hand was against his neighbour; and Branderham, unwilling to remain idle, poured forth his zeal in a shower of loud taps on the boards of the pulpit, which responded so smartly that, at last, to my unspeakable relief, they woke me.
Don’t be afraid, it is but a boy—yet the villain scowls so plainly in his face; would it not be a kindness to the country to hang him at once, before he shows his nature in acts as well as features?’ He pulled me under the chandelier, and Mrs. Linton placed her spectacles on her nose and raised her hands in horror.
I then sat with my doll on my knee till the fire got low, glancing round occasionally to make sure that nothing worse than myself haunted the shadowy room; and when the embers sank to a dull red, I undressed hastily, tugging at knots and strings as I best might, and sought shelter from cold and darkness in my crib.
Having seen Adèle comfortably seated in her little chair by Mrs. Fairfax’s parlour fireside, and given her her best wax doll (which I usually kept enveloped in silver paper in a drawer) to play with, and a story-book for change of amusement; and having replied to her “Revenez bientôt, ma bonne amie, ma chère Mdlle.
Yes; the future bridegroom, Mr. Rochester himself, exercised over his intended a ceaseless surveillance; and it was from this sagacity—this guardedness of his—this perfect, clear consciousness of his fair one’s defects—this obvious absence of passion in his sentiments towards her, that my ever-torturing pain arose.
“And what a sweet-tempered forehead he has!” cried Louisa,—“so smooth—none of those frowning irregularities I dislike so much; and such a placid eye and smile!”

And then, to my great relief, Mr. Henry Lynn summoned them to the other side of the room, to settle some point about the deferred excursion to Hay Common.
Wood is in the vestry, sir, putting on his surplice.”

“And the carriage?”

“The horses are harnessing.”

“We shall not want it to go to church; but it must be ready the moment we return: all the boxes and luggage arranged and strapped on, and the coachman in his seat.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Jane, are you ready?”

I rose.
The two girls, on whom, kneeling down on the wet ground, and looking through the low, latticed window of Moor House kitchen, I had gazed with so bitter a mixture of interest and despair, were my near kinswomen; and the young and stately gentleman who had found me almost dying at his threshold was my blood relation.
You are the one to be blamed: he is willing to let us be friends, at least; Linton and I; and you are not.”

My master, perceiving that she would not take his word for her uncle-in-law’s evil disposition, gave a hasty sketch of his conduct to Isabella, and the manner in which Wuthering Heights became his property.
While I tried to devour my tears, a fit of coughing seized Helen; it did not, however, wake the nurse; when it was over, she lay some minutes exhausted; then she whispered—

“Jane, your little feet are bare; lie down and cover yourself with my quilt.”

I did so: she put her arm over me, and I nestled close to her.
Young lady, I am disposed to be gregarious and communicative to-night.”

With this announcement he rose from his chair, and stood, leaning his arm on the marble mantelpiece: in that attitude his shape was seen plainly as well as his face; his unusual breadth of chest, disproportionate almost to his length of limb.
Some time passed before he spoke; he at last said—

“Come to my side, Jane, and let us explain and understand one another.”

“I will never again come to your side: I am torn away now, and cannot return.”

“But, Jane, I summon you as my wife: it is you only I intend to marry.”

I was silent: I thought he mocked me.
It seems her career there was very honourable: from a pupil, she became a teacher, like yourself—really it strikes me there are parallel points in her history and yours—she left it to be a governess: there, again, your fates were analogous; she undertook the education of the ward of a certain Mr. Rochester.”

“Mr.
A wild, wicked slip she was—but she had the bonniest eye, the sweetest smile, and lightest foot in the parish: and, after all, I believe she meant no harm; for when once she made you cry in good earnest, it seldom happened that she would not keep you company, and oblige you to be quiet that you might comfort her.
There’s a pack o’ corn i’ t’ corner, thear, meeterly clane; if ye’re feared o’ muckying yer grand silk cloes, spread yer hankerchir o’ t’ top on’t.”

The “rahm” was a kind of lumber-hole smelling strong of malt and grain; various sacks of which articles were piled around, leaving a wide, bare space in the middle.
“You’ll get nobody to take that, Catherine,” I said, “if you write it; and at present I shall put out your candle.”

I set the extinguisher on the flame, receiving as I did so a slap on my hand and a petulant “cross thing!” I then quitted her again, and she drew the bolt in one of her worst, most peevish humours.
You’re so low, I daresay I shall keep up with you.”

“No,” she repeated, and continued sauntering on, pausing at intervals to muse over a bit of moss, or a tuft of blanched grass, or a fungus spreading its bright orange among the heaps of brown foliage; and, ever and anon, her hand was lifted to her averted face.
Before we reached home, Catherine’s displeasure softened into a perplexed sensation of pity and regret, largely blended with vague, uneasy doubts about Linton’s actual circumstances, physical and social: in which I partook, though I counselled her not to say much; for a second journey would make us better judges.
her cousin was very ill.

“‘We know that!’ answered Heathcliff; ‘but his life is not worth a farthing, and I won’t spend a farthing on him.’

“‘But I cannot tell how to do,’ she said; ‘and if nobody will help me, he’ll die!’

“‘Walk out of the room,’ cried the master, ‘and let me never hear a word more about him!
My housekeeper never wearies of talking about and praising you; and she’ll be greatly disappointed if I return with no news of or from you, except that you received her letter and said nothing!”

She appeared to wonder at this speech, and asked,—

“Does Ellen like you?”

“Yes, very well,” I replied, hesitatingly.
Did you sit at them long each day?”

“I had nothing else to do, because it was the vacation, and I sat at them from morning till noon, and from noon till night: the length of the midsummer days favoured my inclination to apply.”

“And you felt self-satisfied with the result of your ardent labours?”

“Far from it.
Here then I was in the third storey, fastened into one of its mystic cells; night around me; a pale and bloody spectacle under my eyes and hands; a murderess hardly separated from me by a single door: yes—that was appalling—the rest I could bear; but I shuddered at the thought of Grace Poole bursting out upon me.
I sat down on the narrow ledge; I hushed the scared infant in my lap: you turned an angle of the road: I bent forward to take a last look; the wall crumbled; I was shaken; the child rolled from my knee, I lost my balance, fell, and woke.”

“Now, Jane, that is all.”

“All the preface, sir; the tale is yet to come.
I got out of the coach, gave a box I had into the ostler’s charge, to be kept till I called for it; paid my fare; satisfied the coachman, and was going: the brightening day gleamed on the sign of the inn, and I read in gilt letters, “The Rochester Arms.” My heart leapt up: I was already on my master’s very lands.
She told me she had been walking the earth these twenty years: a just punishment for her mortal transgressions, I’ve no doubt!”

Scarcely were these words uttered when I recollected the association of Heathcliff’s with Catherine’s name in the book, which had completely slipped from my memory, till thus awakened.
His forehead, that I once thought so manly, and that I now think so diabolical, was shaded with a heavy cloud; his basilisk eyes were nearly quenched by sleeplessness, and weeping, perhaps, for the lashes were wet then: his lips devoid of their ferocious sneer, and sealed in an expression of unspeakable sadness.
After breakfast, Catherine insisted on my bringing a chair and sitting with my work under the fir-trees at the end of the house; and she beguiled Hareton, who had perfectly recovered from his accident, to dig and arrange her little garden, which was shifted to that corner by the influence of Joseph’s complaints.
Often, of an evening, when he sat at the window, his desk and papers before him, he would cease reading or writing, rest his chin on his hand, and deliver himself up to I know not what course of thought; but that it was perturbed and exciting might be seen in the frequent flash and changeful dilation of his eye.
You are not perhaps aware,” he continued, edging his chair a little nearer the table, and speaking low, “that there was a lady—a—a lunatic, kept in the house?”

“I have heard something of it.”

“She was kept in very close confinement, ma’am; people even for some years was not absolutely certain of her existence.
I took a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards which my landlord advanced, and filled up an interval of silence by attempting to caress the canine mother, who had left her nursery, and was sneaking wolfishly to the back of my legs, her lip curled up, and her white teeth watering for a snatch.
A minute previously she was violent; now, supported on one arm, and not noticing my refusal to obey her, she seemed to find childish diversion in pulling the feathers from the rents she had just made, and ranging them on the sheet according to their different species: her mind had strayed to other associations.
“He’s in the garden by this time, and impatient to know what answer I shall bring.”

As I spoke, I observed a large dog lying on the sunny grass beneath raise its ears as if about to bark, and then smoothing them back, announce, by a wag of the tail, that some one approached whom it did not consider a stranger.
Indeed, I shouldn’t have discovered that he had been there, except for the disarrangement of the drapery about the corpse’s face, and for observing on the floor a curl of light hair, fastened with a silver thread; which, on examination, I ascertained to have been taken from a locket hung round Catherine’s neck.
It maintains a constant wail—send it out of my hearing for an hour; I sha’n’t stay any longer.”

I rang the bell, and committed it to a servant’s care; and then I inquired what had urged her to escape from Wuthering Heights in such an unlikely plight, and where she meant to go, as she refused remaining with us.
“I won’t go without uncle,” he cried at length: “I can’t tell where you mean to take me.”

I attempted to persuade him of the naughtiness of showing reluctance to meet his father; still he obstinately resisted any progress towards dressing, and I had to call for my master’s assistance in coaxing him out of bed.
As it was, being instructed, he returned an answer, intimating that Mr. Heathcliff objected to his calling at the Grange; but his uncle’s kind remembrance delighted him, and he hoped to meet him sometimes in his rambles, and personally to petition that his cousin and he might not remain long so utterly divided.
While I walked under the dripping orange-trees of my wet garden, and amongst its drenched pomegranates and pine-apples, and while the refulgent dawn of the tropics kindled round me—I reasoned thus, Jane—and now listen; for it was true Wisdom that consoled me in that hour, and showed me the right path to follow.
I’ve loved many others since: my children are dearer to me than she was; and, at death, I shall not rejoice that I am going to her: I shall be sorry that I must leave them!’ Will you say so, Heathcliff?”

“Don’t torture me till I’m as mad as yourself,” cried he, wrenching his head free, and grinding his teeth.
And we’ll see if one tree won’t grow as crooked as another, with the same wind to twist it!” The unsuspecting thing was pleased at this speech: he played with Heathcliff’s whiskers, and stroked his cheek; but I divined its meaning, and observed tartly, “That boy must go back with me to Thrushcross Grange, sir.
Though Hareton has made him a standing jest for six weeks, and I have used more serious measures, and attempted to frighten him out of his idiocy, he gets worse daily; and he’ll be under the sod before summer, unless you restore him!”

“How can you lie so glaringly to the poor child?” I called from the inside.
“Because,” he continued, looking at the two young people, who were fixed under his eye—Linton appeared as if he could not venture to stir or raise his head, and Catherine could not move, on his account—“because that lad yonder seems determined to beat me; and I’d thank his uncle to be quick, and go before him!
He wouldn’t shake hands, and he wouldn’t look: I must show him some way that I like him—that I want to be friends.”

Whether the kiss convinced Hareton, I cannot tell: he was very careful, for some minutes, that his face should not be seen, and when he did raise it, he was sadly puzzled where to turn his eyes.
I can now conjecture readily that this streak of light was, in all likelihood, a gleam from a lantern carried by some one across the lawn: but then, prepared as my mind was for horror, shaken as my nerves were by agitation, I thought the swift darting beam was a herald of some coming vision from another world.
don’t trouble your head about her—put the thing out of your thoughts.”

“Yet it seems to me your life is hardly secure while she stays.”

“Never fear—I will take care of myself.”

“Is the danger you apprehended last night gone by now, sir?”

“I cannot vouch for that till Mason is out of England: nor even then.
Before we had been out two hours, we were deep in a confidential conversation: she had favoured me with a description of the brilliant winter she had spent in London two seasons ago—of the admiration she had there excited—the attention she had received; and I even got hints of the titled conquest she had made.
“Is John getting the carriage ready?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Is the luggage brought down?”

“They are bringing it down, sir.”

“Go you to the church: see if Mr. Wood (the clergyman) and the clerk are there: return and tell me.”

The church, as the reader knows, was but just beyond the gates; the footman soon returned.
The elder one, whom you have seen (and whom I cannot hate, whilst I abhor all his kindred, because he has some grains of affection in his feeble mind, shown in the continued interest he takes in his wretched sister, and also in a dog-like attachment he once bore me), will probably be in the same state one day.
I walked a long time, and when I thought I had nearly done enough, and might conscientiously yield to the fatigue that almost overpowered me—might relax this forced action, and, sitting down on a stone I saw near, submit resistlessly to the apathy that clogged heart and limb—I heard a bell chime—a church bell.
He just looked in at the doors I opened; and when he had wandered upstairs and downstairs, he said I must have gone through a great deal of fatigue and trouble to have effected such considerable changes in so short a time: but not a syllable did he utter indicating pleasure in the improved aspect of his abode.
No happy reconciliation was to be had with him—no cheering smile or generous word: but still the Christian was patient and placid; and when I asked him if he forgave me, he answered that he was not in the habit of cherishing the remembrance of vexation; that he had nothing to forgive, not having been offended.
“To be sure, considering the exhibition you performed in his presence this afternoon, I might say it would be wise to refuse him: since he asked you after that, he must either be hopelessly stupid or a venturesome fool.”

“If you talk so, I won’t tell you any more,” she returned, peevishly rising to her feet.
I wish I had not taken that.” Then a good while after I heard her murmur, “No, I’ll not die—he’d be glad—he does not love me at all—he would never miss me!”

“Did you want anything, ma’am?” I inquired, still preserving my external composure, in spite of her ghastly countenance and strange, exaggerated manner.
Then I am not like him, am I?”

“Not much,” I answered: not a morsel, I thought, surveying with regret the white complexion and slim frame of my companion, and his large languid eyes—his mother’s eyes, save that, unless a morbid touchiness kindled them a moment, they had not a vestige of her sparkling spirit.
Is papa alive?”

“Yes,” I cried: “yes, my angel, he is, God be thanked, you are safe with us again!”

She wanted to run, breathless as she was, upstairs to Mr. Linton’s room; but I compelled her to sit down on a chair, and made her drink, and washed her pale face, chafing it into a faint colour with my apron.
We heard him mount the stairs directly; he did not proceed to his ordinary chamber, but turned into that with the panelled bed: its window, as I mentioned before, is wide enough for anybody to get through; and it struck me that he plotted another midnight excursion, of which he had rather we had no suspicion.
Mr. Brocklehurst and his family never came near Lowood now: household matters were not scrutinised into; the cross housekeeper was gone, driven away by the fear of infection; her successor, who had been matron at the Lowton Dispensary, unused to the ways of her new abode, provided with comparative liberality.
I felt a conscientious solicitude for Adèle’s welfare and progress, and a quiet liking for her little self: just as I cherished towards Mrs. Fairfax a thankfulness for her kindness, and a pleasure in her society proportionate to the tranquil regard she had for me, and the moderation of her mind and character.
I could not forget his look and his paleness when he whispered: “Jane, I have got a blow—I have got a blow, Jane.” I could not forget how the arm had trembled which he rested on my shoulder: and it was no light matter which could thus bow the resolute spirit and thrill the vigorous frame of Fairfax Rochester.
“After all, it is of no great importance, perhaps,” she murmured to herself: “and then I may get better; and to humble myself so to her is painful.”

She made an effort to alter her position, but failed: her face changed; she seemed to experience some inward sensation—the precursor, perhaps, of the last pang.
To prevent it, I shall send him about his business this very morning; and after he’s gone, I’d advise you all to look sharp: I shall only have the more humour for you.”

“I never saw Heathcliff last night,” answered Catherine, beginning to sob bitterly: “and if you do turn him out of doors, I’ll go with him.
He means to offer liberal payment for permission to lodge at the Heights; and doubtless my brother’s covetousness will prompt him to accept the terms: he was always greedy; though what he grasps with one hand he flings away with the other.”

“It’s a nice place for a young man to fix his dwelling in!” said I.
Leaving aside the degradation of an alliance with a nameless man, and the possible fact that his property, in default of heirs male, might pass into such a one’s power, he had sense to comprehend Heathcliff’s disposition: to know that, though his exterior was altered, his mind was unchangeable and unchanged.
The fire does make it smart.”

She insisted on my fulfilling her directions, before she would let me touch her; and not till after the coachman had been instructed to get ready, and a maid set to pack up some necessary attire, did I obtain her consent for binding the wound and helping to change her garments.
Weeks passed on, and Cathy recovered her temper; though she grew wondrous fond of stealing off to corners by herself and often, if I came near her suddenly while reading, she would start and bend over the book, evidently desirous to hide it; and I detected edges of loose paper sticking out beyond the leaves.
“On my second visit Linton seemed in lively spirits; and Zillah (that is their housekeeper) made us a clean room and a good fire, and told us that, as Joseph was out at a prayer-meeting and Hareton Earnshaw was off with his dogs—robbing our woods of pheasants, as I heard afterwards—we might do what we liked.
The garden was a wide inclosure, surrounded with walls so high as to exclude every glimpse of prospect; a covered verandah ran down one side, and broad walks bordered a middle space divided into scores of little beds: these beds were assigned as gardens for the pupils to cultivate, and each bed had an owner.
It is not likely; and now it is time for you to come in; you’ll catch the fever if you stop out when the dew is falling.”

The nurse closed the front door; I went in by the side entrance which led to the schoolroom: I was just in time; it was nine o’clock, and Miss Miller was calling the pupils to go to bed.
“After sitting still an hour, I looked at the great room with its smooth uncarpeted floor, and thought how nice it would be to play in, if we removed the table; and I asked Linton to call Zillah in to help us, and we’d have a game at blindman’s-buff; she should try to catch us: you used to, you know, Ellen.
Have you any relations besides Mrs. Reed?”

“I think not, sir.”

“None belonging to your father?”

“I don’t know: I asked Aunt Reed once, and she said possibly I might have some poor, low relations called Eyre, but she knew nothing about them.”

“If you had such, would you like to go to them?”

I reflected.
As to her money, she first secreted it in odd corners, wrapped in a rag or an old curl-paper; but some of these hoards having been discovered by the housemaid, Eliza, fearful of one day losing her valued treasure, consented to intrust it to her mother, at a usurious rate of interest—fifty or sixty per cent.
This afternoon, instead of dreaming of Deepden, I was wondering how a man who wished to do right could act so unjustly and unwisely as Charles the First sometimes did; and I thought what a pity it was that, with his integrity and conscientiousness, he could see no farther than the prerogatives of the crown.
How different had this scene looked when I viewed it laid out beneath the iron sky of winter, stiffened in frost, shrouded with snow!—when mists as chill as death wandered to the impulse of east winds along those purple peaks, and rolled down “ing” and holm till they blended with the frozen fog of the beck!
My pupil was a lively child, who had been spoilt and indulged, and therefore was sometimes wayward; but as she was committed entirely to my care, and no injudicious interference from any quarter ever thwarted my plans for her improvement, she soon forgot her little freaks, and became obedient and teachable.
Bessie said she was sure you would not refuse: but I suppose you will have to ask leave before you can get off?”

“Yes; and I will do it now;” and having directed him to the servants’ hall, and recommended him to the care of John’s wife, and the attentions of John himself, I went in search of Mr. Rochester.
Instead of living for, in, and with yourself, as a reasonable being ought, you seek only to fasten your feebleness on some other person’s strength: if no one can be found willing to burden her or himself with such a fat, weak, puffy, useless thing, you cry out that you are ill-treated, neglected, miserable.
“I believe,” she said, “I was quite mista’en in my thoughts of you: but there is so mony cheats goes about, you mun forgie me.”

“And though,” I continued, rather severely, “you wished to turn me from the door, on a night when you should not have shut out a dog.”

“Well, it was hard: but what can a body do?
I stretched my hand to take a glass of water from a hireling, and it was given me by you: I asked a question, expecting John’s wife to answer me, and your voice spoke at my ear.”

“Because I had come in, in Mary’s stead, with the tray.”

“And there is enchantment in the very hour I am now spending with you.
I reached this book, and a pot of ink from a shelf, and pushed the house-door ajar to give me light, and I have got the time on with writing for twenty minutes; but my companion is impatient, and proposes that we should appropriate the dairywoman’s cloak, and have a scamper on the moors, under its shelter.
“She’s been fretting here,” I continued, “and eating scarcely anything, and never complaining: she would admit none of us till this evening, and so we couldn’t inform you of her state, as we were not aware of it ourselves; but it is nothing.”

I felt I uttered my explanations awkwardly; the master frowned.
Opening the window, I walked in upon them; liberated Céline from my protection; gave her notice to vacate her hotel; offered her a purse for immediate exigencies; disregarded screams, hysterics, prayers, protestations, convulsions; made an appointment with the vicomte for a meeting at the Bois de Boulogne.
It little mattered whether my curiosity irritated him; I knew the pleasure of vexing and soothing him by turns; it was one I chiefly delighted in, and a sure instinct always prevented me from going too far; beyond the verge of provocation I never ventured; on the extreme brink I liked well to try my skill.
“Eagerness of a listener!” repeated she: “yes; Mr. Rochester has sat by the hour, his ear inclined to the fascinating lips that took such delight in their task of communicating; and Mr. Rochester was so willing to receive and looked so grateful for the pastime given him; you have noticed this?”

“Grateful!
Briggs intimates that the answer to his application was not from Mr. Rochester, but from a lady: it is signed ‘Alice Fairfax.’”

I felt cold and dismayed: my worst fears then were probably true: he had in all probability left England and rushed in reckless desperation to some former haunt on the Continent.
I do myself the honour of calling as soon as possible after my arrival, to express the hope that I have not inconvenienced you by my perseverance in soliciting the occupation of Thrushcross Grange: I heard yesterday you had had some thoughts—”

“Thrushcross Grange is my own, sir,” he interrupted, wincing.
The snow lay yards deep in our road; and, as we floundered on, my companion wearied me with constant reproaches that I had not brought a pilgrim’s staff: telling me that I could never get into the house without one, and boastfully flourishing a heavy-headed cudgel, which I understood to be so denominated.
In the place where she heard Heathcliff termed a “vulgar young ruffian,” and “worse than a brute,” she took care not to act like him; but at home she had small inclination to practise politeness that would only be laughed at, and restrain an unruly nature when it would bring her neither credit nor praise.
or else I shall be obliged to inform my master of your designs; and he’ll take measures to secure his house and its inmates from any such unwarrantable intrusions!”

“In that case I’ll take measures to secure you, woman!” exclaimed Heathcliff; “you shall not leave Wuthering Heights till to-morrow morning.
“Stop,” she cried, “you must listen to me first; and I can’t speak while those clouds are floating in my face.”

“Will you go to the devil!” he exclaimed, ferociously, “and let me be!”

“No,” she persisted, “I won’t: I can’t tell what to do to make you talk to me; and you are determined not to understand.
Poverty looks grim to grown people; still more so to children: they have not much idea of industrious, working, respectable poverty; they think of the word only as connected with ragged clothes, scanty food, fireless grates, rude manners, and debasing vices: poverty for me was synonymous with degradation.
I covered my head and arms with the skirt of my frock, and went out to walk in a part of the plantation which was quite sequestrated; but I found no pleasure in the silent trees, the falling fir-cones, the congealed relics of autumn, russet leaves, swept by past winds in heaps, and now stiffened together.
It is as fine a picture as any Miss Reed’s drawing-master could paint, let alone the young ladies themselves, who could not come near it: and have you learnt French?”

“Yes, Bessie, I can both read it and speak it.”

“And you can work on muslin and canvas?”

“I can.”

“Oh, you are quite a lady, Miss Jane!
“All men must die,” said a voice quite close at hand; “but all are not condemned to meet a lingering and premature doom, such as yours would be if you perished here of want.”

“Who or what speaks?” I asked, terrified at the unexpected sound, and incapable now of deriving from any occurrence a hope of aid.
Pure, bracing ventilation they must have up there at all times, indeed: one may guess the power of the north wind, blowing over the edge, by the excessive slant of a few stunted firs at the end of the house; and by a range of gaunt thorns all stretching their limbs one way, as if craving alms of the sun.
Joseph had instilled into him a pride of name, and of his lineage; he would, had he dared, have fostered hate between him and the present owner of the Heights: but his dread of that owner amounted to superstition; and he confined his feelings regarding him to muttered innuendoes and private comminations.
“And he knows your papa wouldn’t let us marry now; and he’s afraid of my dying if we wait; so we are to be married in the morning, and you are to stay here all night; and, if you do as he wishes, you shall return home next day, and take me with you.”

“Take you with her, pitiful changeling!” I exclaimed.
The words in these introductory pages connected themselves with the succeeding vignettes, and gave significance to the rock standing up alone in a sea of billow and spray; to the broken boat stranded on a desolate coast; to the cold and ghastly moon glancing through bars of cloud at a wreck just sinking.
“Hardened girl!” exclaimed Miss Scatcherd; “nothing can correct you of your slatternly habits: carry the rod away.”

Burns obeyed: I looked at her narrowly as she emerged from the book-closet; she was just putting back her handkerchief into her pocket, and the trace of a tear glistened on her thin cheek.
One afternoon in January, Mrs. Fairfax had begged a holiday for Adèle, because she had a cold; and, as Adèle seconded the request with an ardour that reminded me how precious occasional holidays had been to me in my own childhood, I accorded it, deeming that I did well in showing pliability on the point.
One gleam of light lifted into relief a half-submerged mast, on which sat a cormorant, dark and large, with wings flecked with foam; its beak held a gold bracelet set with gems, that I had touched with as brilliant tints as my palette could yield, and as glittering distinctness as my pencil could impart.
Afternoon arrived: Mrs. Fairfax assumed her best black satin gown, her gloves, and her gold watch; for it was her part to receive the company,—to conduct the ladies to their rooms, &c. Adèle, too, would be dressed: though I thought she had little chance of being introduced to the party that day at least.
Put on your things; go out by the kitchen-door: take the road towards the head of Marsh Glen: I will join you in a moment.”

I know no medium: I never in my life have known any medium in my dealings with positive, hard characters, antagonistic to my own, between absolute submission and determined revolt.
“There is no clause in the will to secure it so: his property would go to me; but, to prevent disputes, I desire their union, and am resolved to bring it about.”

“And I’m resolved she shall never approach your house with me again,” I returned, as we reached the gate, where Miss Cathy waited our coming.
We stayed there nearly a week: I and Sophie used to walk every day in a great green place full of trees, called the Park; and there were many children there besides me, and a pond with beautiful birds in it, that I fed with crumbs.”

“Can you understand her when she runs on so fast?” asked Mrs. Fairfax.
I briefly related to him what had transpired: the strange laugh I had heard in the gallery: the step ascending to the third storey; the smoke,—the smell of fire which had conducted me to his room; in what state I had found matters there, and how I had deluged him with all the water I could lay hands on.
Georgiana said she dreaded being left alone with Eliza; from her she got neither sympathy in her dejection, support in her fears, nor aid in her preparations; so I bore with her feeble-minded wailings and selfish lamentations as well as I could, and did my best in sewing for her and packing her dresses.
I followed with lagging step, and thoughts busily bent on discovering a means of extrication; but he himself looked so composed and so grave also, I became ashamed of feeling any confusion: the evil—if evil existent or prospective there was—seemed to lie with me only; his mind was unconscious and quiet.
What do you fear?—that I shall not prove a good husband?”

“It is the idea farthest from my thoughts.”

“Are you apprehensive of the new sphere you are about to enter?—of the new life into which you are passing?”

“No.”

“You puzzle me, Jane: your look and tone of sorrowful audacity perplex and pain me.
Catherine, last spring at this time, I was longing to have you under this roof; now, I wish you were a mile or two up those hills: the air blows so sweetly, I feel that it would cure you.”

“I shall never be there but once more,” said the invalid; “and then you’ll leave me, and I shall remain for ever.
He didn’t cast a glance towards my companions, though they were sufficiently near for Linton’s sobs to be audible; but hailing me in the almost hearty tone he assumed to none besides, and the sincerity of which I couldn’t avoid doubting, he said—

“It is something to see you so near to my house, Nelly.
The red fire-light glowed on their two bonny heads, and revealed their faces animated with the eager interest of children; for, though he was twenty-three and she eighteen, each had so much of novelty to feel and learn, that neither experienced nor evinced the sentiments of sober disenchanted maturity.
“How would you like it?”

“They won’t do that,” he replied: “if they did, you must have me removed secretly; and if you neglect it you shall prove, practically, that the dead are not annihilated!”

As soon as he heard the other members of the family stirring he retired to his den, and I breathed freer.
You told Mr. Brocklehurst I had a bad character, a deceitful disposition; and I’ll let everybody at Lowood know what you are, and what you have done.”

“Jane, you don’t understand these things: children must be corrected for their faults.”

“Deceit is not my fault!” I cried out in a savage, high voice.
But the morning passed just as usual: nothing happened to interrupt the quiet course of Adèle’s studies; only soon after breakfast, I heard some bustle in the neighbourhood of Mr. Rochester’s chamber, Mrs. Fairfax’s voice, and Leah’s, and the cook’s—that is, John’s wife—and even John’s own gruff tones.
And now, never mind what I have been: don’t trouble your head further about me; but tell me the name of the house where we are.”

“Some calls it Marsh End, and some calls it Moor House.”

“And the gentleman who lives here is called Mr. St. John?”

“Nay; he doesn’t live here: he is only staying a while.
I did not call her unfeeling long; for I perceived she was in purgatory throughout the day, and wearying to find an opportunity of getting by herself, or paying a visit to Heathcliff, who had been locked up by the master: as I discovered, on endeavouring to introduce to him a private mess of victuals.
I got together good store of dainties, and slung them in a basket on one side of the saddle; and she sprang up as gay as a fairy, sheltered by her wide-brimmed hat and gauze veil from the July sun, and trotted off with a merry laugh, mocking my cautious counsel to avoid galloping, and come back early.
I could not wring from my little lady how she had spent the day; except that, as I supposed, the goal of her pilgrimage was Penistone Crags; and she arrived without adventure to the gate of the farm-house, when Hareton happened to issue forth, attended by some canine followers, who attacked her train.
In vain she wept and writhed against the interdict, and implored her father to have pity on Linton: all she got to comfort her was a promise that he would write and give him leave to come to the Grange when he pleased; but explaining that he must no longer expect to see Catherine at Wuthering Heights.
The stone was just broad enough to accommodate, comfortably, another girl and me, at that time my chosen comrade—one Mary Ann Wilson; a shrewd, observant personage, whose society I took pleasure in, partly because she was witty and original, and partly because she had a manner which set me at my ease.
We parted finally at the door of the Brocklehurst Arms there: each went her separate way; she set off for the brow of Lowood Fell to meet the conveyance which was to take her back to Gateshead, I mounted the vehicle which was to bear me to new duties and a new life in the unknown environs of Millcote.
She had his companionship no longer; I esteemed it a duty to supply its lack, as much as possible, with mine: an inefficient substitute; for I could only spare two or three hours, from my numerous diurnal occupations, to follow her footsteps, and then my society was obviously less desirable than his.
Miles, the master, affirmed that he would do very well if he had fewer cakes and sweetmeats sent him from home; but the mother’s heart turned from an opinion so harsh, and inclined rather to the more refined idea that John’s sallowness was owing to over-application and, perhaps, to pining after home.
Habitually obedient to John, I came up to his chair: he spent some three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as he could without damaging the roots: I knew he would soon strike, and while dreading the blow, I mused on the disgusting and ugly appearance of him who would presently deal it.
Farther off were hills: not so lofty as those round Lowood, nor so craggy, nor so like barriers of separation from the living world; but yet quiet and lonely hills enough, and seeming to embrace Thornfield with a seclusion I had not expected to find existent so near the stirring locality of Millcote.
“You have no right to preach to me, you neophyte, that have not passed the porch of life, and are absolutely unacquainted with its mysteries.”

“I only remind you of your own words, sir: you said error brought remorse, and you pronounced remorse the poison of existence.”

“And who talks of error now?
Georgiana should take her own course; and she, Eliza, would take hers.”

Georgiana, when not unburdening her heart to me, spent most of her time in lying on the sofa, fretting about the dulness of the house, and wishing over and over again that her aunt Gibson would send her an invitation up to town.
The governess had run away two months before; and for all Mr. Rochester sought her as if she had been the most precious thing he had in the world, he never could hear a word of her; and he grew savage—quite savage on his disappointment: he never was a wild man, but he got dangerous after he lost her.
Catherine and he were constant companions still at his seasons of respite from labour; but he had ceased to express his fondness for her in words, and recoiled with angry suspicion from her girlish caresses, as if conscious there could be no gratification in lavishing such marks of affection on him.
I was rocking Hareton on my knee, and humming a song that began,—

It was far in the night, and the bairnies grat,
The mither beneath the mools heard that,

when Miss Cathy, who had listened to the hubbub from her room, put her head in, and whispered,—“Are you alone, Nelly?”

“Yes, Miss,” I replied.
“And the gate is open: he is somewhere out of hearing; for he would not reply, though I shouted at the top of the fold as loud as I could.”

Joseph objected at first; she was too much in earnest, however, to suffer contradiction; and at last he placed his hat on his head, and walked grumbling forth.
He said the pleasantest manner of spending a hot July day was lying from morning till evening on a bank of heath in the middle of the moors, with the bees humming dreamily about among the bloom, and the larks singing high up overhead, and the blue sky and bright sun shining steadily and cloudlessly.
I have an inward treasure born with me, which can keep me alive if all extraneous delights should be withheld, or offered only at a price I cannot afford to give.’ The forehead declares, ‘Reason sits firm and holds the reins, and she will not let the feelings burst away and hurry her to wild chasms.
He was kept, to be sure, rather cross and crusty; but on the whole I could see he was excellently entertained, and that a lamb-like submission and turtle-dove sensibility, while fostering his despotism more, would have pleased his judgment, satisfied his common-sense, and even suited his taste less.
“The Lord help us!” he soliloquised in an undertone of peevish displeasure, while relieving me of my horse: looking, meantime, in my face so sourly that I charitably conjectured he must have need of divine aid to digest his dinner, and his pious ejaculation had no reference to my unexpected advent.
Not anxious to come in contact with their fangs, I sat still; but, imagining they would scarcely understand tacit insults, I unfortunately indulged in winking and making faces at the trio, and some turn of my physiognomy so irritated madam, that she suddenly broke into a fury and leapt on my knees.
There was no reply to my question; and on looking round I saw only Joseph bringing in a pail of porridge for the dogs, and Mrs. Heathcliff leaning over the fire, diverting herself with burning a bundle of matches which had fallen from the chimney-piece as she restored the tea-canister to its place.
She also got a trick of coming down early in the morning and lingering about the kitchen, as if she were expecting the arrival of something; and she had a small drawer in a cabinet in the library, which she would trifle over for hours, and whose key she took special care to remove when she left it.
From dinner to tea she would lie in her breeze-rocked cradle, doing nothing except singing old songs—my nursery lore—to herself, or watching the birds, joint tenants, feed and entice their young ones to fly: or nestling with closed lids, half thinking, half dreaming, happier than words can express.
She brought me some warm wine and gingerbread, and appeared exceedingly good-natured, and Linton sat in the arm-chair, and I in the little rocking chair on the hearth-stone, and we laughed and talked so merrily, and found so much to say: we planned where we would go, and what we would do in summer.
Miss Gryce snored at last; she was a heavy Welshwoman, and till now her habitual nasal strains had never been regarded by me in any other light than as a nuisance; to-night I hailed the first deep notes with satisfaction; I was debarrassed of interruption; my half-effaced thought instantly revived.
“Address, J.E., Post-office, Lowton, ——shire.”

This document remained locked in my drawer all day: after tea, I asked leave of the new superintendent to go to Lowton, in order to perform some small commissions for myself and one or two of my fellow-teachers; permission was readily granted; I went.
Yes: does that leave hope for me?”

“Hope of what, sir?”

“Of my final re-transformation from India-rubber back to flesh?”

“Decidedly he has had too much wine,” I thought; and I did not know what answer to make to his queer question: how could I tell whether he was capable of being re-transformed?
“Mason!—the West Indies!” he said, in the tone one might fancy a speaking automaton to enounce its single words; “Mason!—the West Indies!” he reiterated; and he went over the syllables three times, growing, in the intervals of speaking, whiter than ashes: he hardly seemed to know what he was doing.
Mary and I sit in the kitchen sometimes, because at home we like to be free, even to license—but you are a visitor, and must go into the parlour.”

“I am very well here.”

“Not at all, with Hannah bustling about and covering you with flour.”

“Besides, the fire is too hot for you,” interposed Mary.
He saw nature—he saw books through me; and never did I weary of gazing for his behalf, and of putting into words the effect of field, tree, town, river, cloud, sunbeam—of the landscape before us; of the weather round us—and impressing by sound on his ear what light could no longer stamp on his eye.
und Heathcliff’s noan t’ chap to coom at my whistle—happen he’ll be less hard o’ hearing wi’ ye!”

It was a very dark evening for summer: the clouds appeared inclined to thunder, and I said we had better all sit down; the approaching rain would be certain to bring him home without further trouble.
“I heard of your marriage, Cathy, not long since; and, while waiting in the yard below, I meditated this plan—just to have one glimpse of your face, a stare of surprise, perhaps, and pretended pleasure; afterwards settle my score with Hindley; and then prevent the law by doing execution on myself.
It is strange, Linton, that for the second time you have brought me here on purpose, apparently to distress us both, and for no reason besides!”

Linton shivered, and glanced at her, half supplicating, half ashamed; but his cousin’s patience was not sufficient to endure this enigmatical behaviour.
Thereat, Catherine silently turned her face from us, and, very stealthily, drew out her pocket-handkerchief and applied it to her eyes; and her cousin, after struggling awhile to keep down his softer feelings, pulled out the letter and flung it on the floor beside her, as ungraciously as he could.
Say whatever your memory suggests is true; but add nothing and exaggerate nothing.”

I resolved, in the depth of my heart, that I would be most moderate—most correct; and, having reflected a few minutes in order to arrange coherently what I had to say, I told her all the story of my sad childhood.
I have just opened the window, to let in a little air and sunshine; for everything gets so damp in apartments that are seldom inhabited; the drawing-room yonder feels like a vault.”

She pointed to a wide arch corresponding to the window, and hung like it with a Tyrian-dyed curtain, now looped up.
Oliver pays for two.”

“Does he?”

“He means to give the whole school a treat at Christmas.”

“I know.”

“Was it your suggestion?”

“No.”

“Whose, then?”

“His daughter’s, I think.”

“It is like her: she is so good-natured.”

“Yes.”

Again came the blank of a pause: the clock struck eight strokes.
This was especially to be remarked if any one attempted to impose upon, or domineer over, his favourite: he was painfully jealous lest a word should be spoken amiss to him; seeming to have got into his head the notion that, because he liked Heathcliff, all hated, and longed to do him an ill-turn.
I wish you would speak rationally.”

“Well, that settles it: if you have only to do with the present, marry Mr. Linton.”

“I don’t want your permission for that—I shall marry him: and yet you have not told me whether I’m right.”

“Perfectly right; if people be right to marry only for the present.
Another encounter between you and the master would kill her altogether.”

“With your aid that may be avoided,” he continued; “and should there be danger of such an event—should he be the cause of adding a single trouble more to her existence—why, I think I shall be justified in going to extremes!
Have you walked from Gimmerton this evening?”

“From the Grange,” I replied; “and while they make me lodging room there, I want to finish my business with your master; because I don’t think of having another opportunity in a hurry.”

“What business, sir?” said Nelly, conducting me into the house.
I was yet enjoying the calm prospect and pleasant fresh air, yet listening with delight to the cawing of the rooks, yet surveying the wide, hoary front of the hall, and thinking what a great place it was for one lonely little dame like Mrs. Fairfax to inhabit, when that lady appeared at the door.
I thought sometimes I saw beyond its wild waters a shore, sweet as the hills of Beulah; and now and then a freshening gale, wakened by hope, bore my spirit triumphantly towards the bourne: but I could not reach it, even in fancy—a counteracting breeze blew off land, and continually drove me back.
“Curiosity is a dangerous petition: it is well I have not taken a vow to accord every request—”

“But there can be no danger in complying with this, sir.”

“Utter it, Jane: but I wish that instead of a mere inquiry into, perhaps, a secret, it was a wish for half my estate.”

“Now, King Ahasuerus!
Mary and I would have esteemed ourselves rich with a thousand pounds each; and to St. John such a sum would have been valuable, for the good it would have enabled him to do.”

This explanation given, the subject was dropped, and no further reference made to it by either Mr. Rivers or his sisters.
The breeze was from the west: it came over the hills, sweet with scents of heath and rush; the sky was of stainless blue; the stream descending the ravine, swelled with past spring rains, poured along plentiful and clear, catching golden gleams from the sun, and sapphire tints from the firmament.
Terror made me cruel; and, finding it useless to attempt shaking the creature off, I pulled its wrist on to the broken pane, and rubbed it to and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the bedclothes: still it wailed, “Let me in!” and maintained its tenacious grip, almost maddening me with fear.
I smelt the rich scent of the heating spices; and admired the shining kitchen utensils, the polished clock, decked in holly, the silver mugs ranged on a tray ready to be filled with mulled ale for supper; and above all, the speckless purity of my particular care—the scoured and well-swept floor.
He’s tolerably well, I think, though his studies occupy him rather more than they ought: he is continually among his books, since he has no other society.”

I should not have spoken so if I had known her true condition, but I could not get rid of the notion that she acted a part of her disorder.
This twentieth of March was a beautiful spring day, and when her father had retired, my young lady came down dressed for going out, and said she asked to have a ramble on the edge of the moor with me: Mr. Linton had given her leave, if we went only a short distance and were back within the hour.
None here care what becomes of him; if you do, act the nurse; if you do not, lock him up and leave him.’

“Then she began to bother me, and I said I’d had enough plague with the tiresome thing; we each had our tasks, and hers was to wait on Linton: Mr. Heathcliff bid me leave that labour to her.
I daresay you’ll catch a bad cold or a fever: you have something the matter with you now!”

“Nothing but what I can bear,” he replied; “and with the greatest pleasure, provided you’ll leave me alone: get in, and don’t annoy me.”

I obeyed: and, in passing, I noticed he breathed as fast as a cat.
When I returned to my seat, that lady was just delivering an order of which I did not catch the import; but Burns immediately left the class, and going into the small inner room where the books were kept, returned in half a minute, carrying in her hand a bundle of twigs tied together at one end.
A negotiation was opened through the medium of the ambassador, Sam; and after much pacing to and fro, till, I think, the said Sam’s calves must have ached with the exercise, permission was at last, with great difficulty, extorted from the rigorous Sibyl, for the three to wait upon her in a body.
A sneer, however, whether covert or open, had now no longer that power over me it once possessed: as I sat between my cousins, I was surprised to find how easy I felt under the total neglect of the one and the semi-sarcastic attentions of the other—Eliza did not mortify, nor Georgiana ruffle me.
Show me how to work, or how to seek work: that is all I now ask; then let me go, if it be but to the meanest cottage; but till then, allow me to stay here: I dread another essay of the horrors of homeless destitution.”

“Indeed you shall stay here,” said Diana, putting her white hand on my head.
And that is saying a great deal; for after all, the British peasantry are the best taught, best mannered, most self-respecting of any in Europe: since those days I have seen paysannes and Bäuerinnen; and the best of them seemed to me ignorant, coarse, and besotted, compared with my Morton girls.
There was such anguish in the gush of grief that accompanied this raving, that my compassion made me overlook its folly, and I drew off, half angry to have listened at all, and vexed at having related my ridiculous nightmare, since it produced that agony; though why was beyond my comprehension.
“This is nothing,” cried she: “I was only going to say that heaven did not seem to be my home; and I broke my heart with weeping to come back to earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung me out into the middle of the heath on the top of Wuthering Heights; where I woke sobbing for joy.
I shrank reluctantly from performing my errand; and was actually going away leaving it unsaid, after having put my question about the candles, when a sense of my folly compelled me to return, and mutter, “A person from Gimmerton wishes to see you ma’am.”

“What does he want?” asked Mrs. Linton.
She wouldn’t have borne your abominable behaviour quietly: her detestation and disgust must have found voice.’

“The back of the settle and Earnshaw’s person interposed between me and him; so instead of endeavouring to reach me, he snatched a dinner-knife from the table and flung it at my head.
I’m acting generously to your master: his young chit has no expectations, and should she second my wishes she’ll be provided for at once as joint successor with Linton.”

“If Linton died,” I answered, “and his life is quite uncertain, Catherine would be the heir.”

“No, she would not,” he said.
On reaching the bedroom, we heard the voice of Miss Scatcherd: she was examining drawers; she had just pulled out Helen Burns’s, and when we entered Helen was greeted with a sharp reprimand, and told that to-morrow she should have half-a-dozen of untidily folded articles pinned to her shoulder.
Nothing of the sort was visible; and when I asked a waiter if any one had been to inquire after a Miss Eyre, I was answered in the negative: so I had no resource but to request to be shown into a private room: and here I am waiting, while all sorts of doubts and fears are troubling my thoughts.
With this persuasion I now answered—

“As far as I can see, it would be wiser and more judicious if you were to take to yourself the original at once.”

By this time he had sat down: he had laid the picture on the table before him, and with his brow supported on both hands, hung fondly over it.
We had been wandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning; but since dinner (Mrs. Reed, when there was no company, dined early) the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre, and a rain so penetrating, that further outdoor exercise was now out of the question.
“You looked very much puzzled, Miss Eyre; and though you are not pretty any more than I am handsome, yet a puzzled air becomes you; besides, it is convenient, for it keeps those searching eyes of yours away from my physiognomy, and busies them with the worsted flowers of the rug; so puzzle on.
The Ladies Lynn and Ingram continued to consort in solemn conferences, where they nodded their two turbans at each other, and held up their four hands in confronting gestures of surprise, or mystery, or horror, according to the theme on which their gossip ran, like a pair of magnified puppets.
I proposed to walk the distance quietly by myself; and very quietly, after leaving my box in the ostler’s care, did I slip away from the George Inn, about six o’clock of a June evening, and take the old road to Thornfield: a road which lay chiefly through fields, and was now little frequented.
and how is your charge to-day?”

“We’re tolerable, sir, I thank you,” replied Grace, lifting the boiling mess carefully on to the hob: “rather snappish, but not ’rageous.”

A fierce cry seemed to give the lie to her favourable report: the clothed hyena rose up, and stood tall on its hind-feet.
I used to enjoy a chance meeting with you, Jane, at this time: there was a curious hesitation in your manner: you glanced at me with a slight trouble—a hovering doubt: you did not know what my caprice might be—whether I was going to play the master and be stern, or the friend and be benignant.
One morning at the end of the two years, as I was writing a letter to his dictation, he came and bent over me, and said—“Jane, have you a glittering ornament round your neck?”

I had a gold watch-chain: I answered “Yes.”

“And have you a pale blue dress on?”

And have you a pale blue dress on?
The unfortunate lad is the only one in all this parish that does not guess how he has been cheated.”

“Well, Mrs. Dean, it will be a charitable deed to tell me something of my neighbours: I feel I shall not rest if I go to bed; so be good enough to sit and chat an hour.”

“Oh, certainly, sir!
speak of your own mind: say you are certain I will!”

“No, you forget, Mrs. Linton,” I suggested, “that you have eaten some food with a relish this evening, and to-morrow you will perceive its good effects.”

“If I were only sure it would kill him,” she interrupted, “I’d kill myself directly!
I could scarcely refrain from smiling at this antipathy to the poor fellow; who was a well-made, athletic youth, good-looking in features, and stout and healthy, but attired in garments befitting his daily occupations of working on the farm and lounging among the moors after rabbits and game.
While Michael was refastening the lock of the park door in the afternoon, I got possession of the key, and told him how my cousin wished me to visit him, because he was sick, and couldn’t come to the Grange; and how papa would object to my going: and then I negotiated with him about the pony.
Many a time I have shared between two claimants the precious morsel of brown bread distributed at tea-time; and after relinquishing to a third half the contents of my mug of coffee, I have swallowed the remainder with an accompaniment of secret tears, forced from me by the exigency of hunger.
God is my father; God is my friend: I love Him; I believe He loves me.”

“And shall I see you again, Helen, when I die?”

“You will come to the same region of happiness: be received by the same mighty, universal Parent, no doubt, dear Jane.”

Again I questioned, but this time only in thought.
A snug small room; a round table by a cheerful fire; an arm-chair high-backed and old-fashioned, wherein sat the neatest imaginable little elderly lady, in widow’s cap, black silk gown, and snowy muslin apron; exactly like what I had fancied Mrs. Fairfax, only less stately and milder looking.
This was finally fortunate; the horse was re-established, and the dog was silenced with a “Down, Pilot!” The traveller now, stooping, felt his foot and leg, as if trying whether they were sound; apparently something ailed them, for he halted to the stile whence I had just risen, and sat down.
Wild was the wrestle which should be paramount; but another feeling rose and triumphed: something hard and cynical: self-willed and resolute: it settled his passion and petrified his countenance: he went on—

“During the moment I was silent, Miss Eyre, I was arranging a point with my destiny.
“My little friend!” said he, “I wish I were in a quiet island with only you; and trouble, and danger, and hideous recollections removed from me.”

“Can I help you, sir?—I’d give my life to serve you.”

“Jane, if aid is wanted, I’ll seek it at your hands; I promise you that.”

“Thank you, sir.
It was enough that in yonder closet, opposite my dressing-table, garments said to be hers had already displaced my black stuff Lowood frock and straw bonnet: for not to me appertained that suit of wedding raiment; the pearl-coloured robe, the vapoury veil pendent from the usurped portmanteau.
For my part, I wish you no ill and all good.”

“I believe you, St. John; for I am sure you are incapable of wishing any one ill; but, as I am your kinswoman, I should desire somewhat more of affection than that sort of general philanthropy you extend to mere strangers.”

“Of course,” he said.
He struggled long to keep up an equality with Catherine in her studies, and yielded with poignant though silent regret: but he yielded completely; and there was no prevailing on him to take a step in the way of moving upward, when he found he must, necessarily, sink beneath his former level.
“Now, darling,” said Mr. Linton, addressing his daughter, as they halted at the bottom of the front steps: “your cousin is not so strong or so merry as you are, and he has lost his mother, remember, a very short time since; therefore, don’t expect him to play and run about with you directly.
The fire had smouldered to ashes; the room was filled with the damp, mild air of the cloudy evening; and so still, that not only the murmur of the beck down Gimmerton was distinguishable, but its ripples and its gurgling over the pebbles, or through the large stones which it could not cover.
I wonder Mrs. Reed is not afraid to trust her so far alone.”

The coach drew up; there it was at the gates with its four horses and its top laden with passengers: the guard and coachman loudly urged haste; my trunk was hoisted up; I was taken from Bessie’s neck, to which I clung with kisses.
Tell all the first form to rise up and direct their faces to the wall.”

Miss Temple passed her handkerchief over her lips, as if to smooth away the involuntary smile that curled them; she gave the order, however, and when the first class could take in what was required of them, they obeyed.
“My dear children,” pursued the black marble clergyman, with pathos, “this is a sad, a melancholy occasion; for it becomes my duty to warn you, that this girl, who might be one of God’s own lambs, is a little castaway: not a member of the true flock, but evidently an interloper and an alien.
Thursday came: all work had been completed the previous evening; carpets were laid down, bed-hangings festooned, radiant white counterpanes spread, toilet tables arranged, furniture rubbed, flowers piled in vases: both chambers and saloons looked as fresh and bright as hands could make them.
During all my first sleep, I was following the windings of an unknown road; total obscurity environed me; rain pelted me; I was burdened with the charge of a little child: a very small creature, too young and feeble to walk, and which shivered in my cold arms, and wailed piteously in my ear.
Whether is it better, I ask, to be a slave in a fool’s paradise at Marseilles—fevered with delusive bliss one hour—suffocating with the bitterest tears of remorse and shame the next—or to be a village-schoolmistress, free and honest, in a breezy mountain nook in the healthy heart of England?
Indeed, as he leaned back against the crag behind him, folded his arms on his chest, and fixed his countenance, I saw he was prepared for a long and trying opposition, and had taken in a stock of patience to last him to its close—resolved, however, that that close should be conquest for him.
He wanted you to marry him?”

“He asked me to marry him.”

“That is a fiction—an impudent invention to vex me.”

“I beg your pardon, it is the literal truth: he asked me more than once, and was as stiff about urging his point as ever you could be.”

“Miss Eyre, I repeat it, you can leave me.
My informant said she could only put him off by pledging her word of honour to be prepared on their first meeting after that: when it was to be he didn’t hear; but you urge Mr. Linton to look sharp!”

This news filled me with fresh fears; I outstripped Kenneth, and ran most of the way back.
Show his resemblance to yourself: and then, I hope, Miss Cathy will think twice before she takes the cockatrice!”

“I don’t much mind speaking of his amiable qualities now,” he answered; “because she must either accept him or remain a prisoner, and you along with her, till your master dies.
They’s nowt norther dry nor mensful abaht t’ place: nowt there isn’t!”

She threw down her pipe and bustled in, the girl followed, and I entered too; soon perceiving that her report was true, and, moreover, that I had almost upset her wits by my unwelcome apparition, I bade her be composed.
Several wealthy and benevolent individuals in the county subscribed largely for the erection of a more convenient building in a better situation; new regulations were made; improvements in diet and clothing introduced; the funds of the school were intrusted to the management of a committee.
One day he had had company to dinner, and had sent for my portfolio; in order, doubtless, to exhibit its contents: the gentlemen went away early, to attend a public meeting at Millcote, as Mrs. Fairfax informed me; but the night being wet and inclement, Mr. Rochester did not accompany them.
Richard, how is it with you?”

“The fresh air revives me, Fairfax.”

“Leave the window open on his side, Carter; there is no wind—good-bye, Dick.”

“Fairfax—”

“Well what is it?”

“Let her be taken care of; let her be treated as tenderly as may be: let her—” he stopped and burst into tears.
Well, you too have power over me, and may injure me: yet I dare not show you where I am vulnerable, lest, faithful and friendly as you are, you should transfix me at once.”

“If you have no more to fear from Mr. Mason than you have from me, sir, you are very safe.”

“God grant it may be so!
Her father was affable; and when he entered into conversation with me after tea, he expressed in strong terms his approbation of what I had done in Morton school, and said he only feared, from what he saw and heard, I was too good for the place, and would soon quit it for one more suitable.
Gentle, soft dream, nestling in my arms now, you will fly, too, as your sisters have all fled before you: but kiss me before you go—embrace me, Jane.”

“There, sir—and there!”’

I pressed my lips to his once brilliant and now rayless eyes—I swept his hair from his brow, and kissed that too.
“You cannot now wonder,” continued my master, “that when you rose upon me so unexpectedly last night, I had difficulty in believing you any other than a mere voice and vision, something that would melt to silence and annihilation, as the midnight whisper and mountain echo had melted before.
Catherine’s library was select, and its state of dilapidation proved it to have been well used, though not altogether for a legitimate purpose: scarcely one chapter had escaped a pen-and-ink commentary—at least the appearance of one—covering every morsel of blank that the printer had left.
Frances darling, pull his hair as you go by: I heard him snap his fingers.’ Frances pulled his hair heartily, and then went and seated herself on her husband’s knee, and there they were, like two babies, kissing and talking nonsense by the hour—foolish palaver that we should be ashamed of.
However, having studied for an interval, with a fist on either knee, and a cloud of meditation over her ruddy countenance, she ejaculated—“Ah, times are greatly changed since then!”

“Yes,” I remarked, “you’ve seen a good many alterations, I suppose?”

“I have: and troubles too,” she said.
Heathcliff received no flogging, but he was told that the first word he spoke to Miss Catherine should ensure a dismissal; and Mrs. Earnshaw undertook to keep her sister-in-law in due restraint when she returned home; employing art, not force: with force she would have found it impossible.
Really, when he opened on me in that unreasonable tone of displeasure after I had scolded Heathcliff till I was hoarse for him, I did not care hardly what they did to each other; especially as I felt that, however the scene closed, we should all be driven asunder for nobody knows how long!
She had not the heart to mention her ride, when Thursday came round; I mentioned it for her, and obtained permission to order her out of doors: for the library, where her father stopped a short time daily—the brief period he could bear to sit up—and his chamber, had become her whole world.
I sometimes regretted that I was not handsomer; I sometimes wished to have rosy cheeks, a straight nose, and small cherry mouth; I desired to be tall, stately, and finely developed in figure; I felt it a misfortune that I was so little, so pale, and had features so irregular and so marked.
“I wish,” continued the good lady, “you would ask her a question or two about her parents: I wonder if she remembers them?”

“Adèle,” I inquired, “with whom did you live when you were in that pretty clean town you spoke of?”

“I lived long ago with mama; but she is gone to the Holy Virgin.
Suppose he should be absent spring, summer, and autumn: how joyless sunshine and fine days will seem!”

I hardly know whether I had slept or not after this musing; at any rate, I started wide awake on hearing a vague murmur, peculiar and lugubrious, which sounded, I thought, just above me.
Too often she betrayed this, by the undue vent she gave to a spiteful antipathy she had conceived against little Adèle: pushing her away with some contumelious epithet if she happened to approach her; sometimes ordering her from the room, and always treating her with coldness and acrimony.
The footman who brought the coal, in going out, stopped near Mr. Eshton’s chair, and said something to him in a low voice, of which I heard only the words, “old woman,”—“quite troublesome.”

“Tell her she shall be put in the stocks if she does not take herself off,” replied the magistrate.
I have your permission to retire now, I suppose?”

“No; stay a moment; and tell me what the people in the drawing-room yonder are doing.”

“Discussing the gipsy, I daresay.”

“Sit down!—Let me hear what they said about me.”

“I had better not stay long, sir; it must be near eleven o’clock.
“The sweet wind from Europe was still whispering in the refreshed leaves, and the Atlantic was thundering in glorious liberty; my heart, dried up and scorched for a long time, swelled to the tone, and filled with living blood—my being longed for renewal—my soul thirsted for a pure draught.
This scene was as silent as if all the figures had been shadows and the firelit apartment a picture: so hushed was it, I could hear the cinders fall from the grate, the clock tick in its obscure corner; and I even fancied I could distinguish the click-click of the woman’s knitting-needles.
Though Mr. Rivers had started at the first of those musical accents, as if a thunderbolt had split a cloud over his head, he stood yet, at the close of the sentence, in the same attitude in which the speaker had surprised him—his arm resting on the gate, his face directed towards the west.
“My first view of it shall be in front,” I determined, “where its bold battlements will strike the eye nobly at once, and where I can single out my master’s very window: perhaps he will be standing at it—he rises early: perhaps he is now walking in the orchard, or on the pavement in front.
My young lady gave him several looks, as if she could not exactly make up her mind what to think of him; but now he smiled when he met her eye, and softened his voice in addressing her; and I was foolish enough to imagine the memory of her mother might disarm him from desiring her injury.
“About three times, I think, we have been merry and hopeful, as we were the first evening; the rest of my visits were dreary and troubled: now with his selfishness and spite, and now with his sufferings: but I’ve learned to endure the former with nearly as little resentment as the latter.
You pay her, of course; I should think it quite as expensive,—more so; for you have them both to keep in addition.”

I feared—or should I say, hoped?—the allusion to me would make Mr. Rochester glance my way; and I involuntarily shrank farther into the shade: but he never turned his eyes.
Is it known that Mr. Rochester is to be married?”

“Yes; and to the beautiful Miss Ingram.”

“Shortly?”

“Appearances would warrant that conclusion: and, no doubt (though, with an audacity that wants chastising out of you, you seem to question it), they will be a superlatively happy pair.
I should not settle tamely down into being the forbearing party; I should assign you your share of labour, and compel you to accomplish it, or else it should be left undone: I should insist, also, on your keeping some of those drawling, half-insincere complaints hushed in your own breast.
As John took his horse, and he followed me into the hall, he told me to make haste and put something dry on, and then return to him in the library; and he stopped me, as I made for the staircase, to extort a promise that I would not be long: nor was I long; in five minutes I rejoined him.
I’ve fought through a bitter life since I last heard your voice; and you must forgive me, for I struggled only for you!”

“Catherine, unless we are to have cold tea, please to come to the table,” interrupted Linton, striving to preserve his ordinary tone, and a due measure of politeness.
Catherine came to me, one morning, at eight o’clock, and said she was that day an Arabian merchant, going to cross the Desert with his caravan; and I must give her plenty of provision for herself and beasts: a horse, and three camels, personated by a large hound and a couple of pointers.
“It requires some study; and so I’ll leave you to your rest, and go think it over.”

I thought it over aloud, in my master’s presence; walking straight from her room to his, and relating the whole story: with the exception of her conversations with her cousin, and any mention of Hareton.
We had nearly finished, and the two young people prudently shifted wider asunder, so I anticipated no further disturbance during that sitting: when Joseph appeared at the door, revealing by his quivering lip and furious eyes that the outrage committed on his precious shrubs was detected.
The red-room was a square chamber, very seldom slept in, I might say never, indeed, unless when a chance influx of visitors at Gateshead Hall rendered it necessary to turn to account all the accommodation it contained: yet it was one of the largest and stateliest chambers in the mansion.
The porridge is burnt again!”

“Silence!” ejaculated a voice; not that of Miss Miller, but one of the upper teachers, a little and dark personage, smartly dressed, but of somewhat morose aspect, who installed herself at the top of one table, while a more buxom lady presided at the other.
The hall, too, was scoured; and the great carved clock, as well as the steps and banisters of the staircase, were polished to the brightness of glass; in the dining-room, the sideboard flashed resplendent with plate; in the drawing-room and boudoir, vases of exotics bloomed on all sides.
For a handsome and not an unamiable-looking man, he repelled me exceedingly: there was no power in that smooth-skinned face of a full oval shape: no firmness in that aquiline nose and small cherry mouth; there was no thought on the low, even forehead; no command in that blank, brown eye.
It was not a bright or splendid summer evening, though fair and soft: the haymakers were at work all along the road; and the sky, though far from cloudless, was such as promised well for the future: its blue—where blue was visible—was mild and settled, and its cloud strata high and thin.
I rave: perhaps at this moment he is watching the sun rise over the Pyrenees, or on the tideless sea of the south.”

I had coasted along the lower wall of the orchard—turned its angle: there was a gate just there, opening into the meadow, between two stone pillars crowned by stone balls.
“Well, ma’am, afterwards the house was burnt to the ground: there are only some bits of walls standing now.”

“Were any other lives lost?”

“No—perhaps it would have been better if there had.”

“What do you mean?”

“Poor Mr. Edward!” he ejaculated, “I little thought ever to have seen it!
A pleasant suggestion—and then, if the surly old man come in, he may believe his prophecy verified—we cannot be damper, or colder, in the rain than we are here.”

* * * * * *

I suppose Catherine fulfilled her project, for the next sentence took up another subject: she waxed lachrymose.
The master tried to explain the matter; but he was really half dead with fatigue, and all that I could make out, amongst her scolding, was a tale of his seeing it starving, and houseless, and as good as dumb, in the streets of Liverpool, where he picked it up and inquired for its owner.
I sent for Kenneth, and he came; but not till the beast had changed into carrion: he was both dead and cold, and stark; and so you’ll allow it was useless making more stir about him!”

The old servant confirmed this statement, but muttered:

“I’d rayther he’d goan hisseln for t’ doctor!
If the dead villain could rise from his grave to abuse me for his offspring’s wrongs, I should have the fun of seeing the said offspring fight him back again, indignant that he should dare to rail at the one friend he has in the world!”

Heathcliff chuckled a fiendish laugh at the idea.
“Then you are married, Bessie?”

“Yes; nearly five years since to Robert Leaven, the coachman; and I’ve a little girl besides Bobby there, that I’ve christened Jane.”

“And you don’t live at Gateshead?”

“I live at the lodge: the old porter has left.”

“Well, and how do they all get on?
I don’t think he has ever been resident at Thornfield for a fortnight together, since the death of his brother without a will left him master of the estate; and, indeed, no wonder he shuns the old place.”

“Why should he shun it?”

“Perhaps he thinks it gloomy.”

The answer was evasive.
“Now, Carter, be on the alert,” he said to this last: “I give you but half-an-hour for dressing the wound, fastening the bandages, getting the patient downstairs and all.”

“But is he fit to move, sir?”

“No doubt of it; it is nothing serious; he is nervous, his spirits must be kept up.
It will soon be no more than a sacrifice consumed.”

And then she would pout like a disappointed child; a pensive cloud would soften her radiant vivacity; she would withdraw her hand hastily from his, and turn in transient petulance from his aspect, at once so heroic and so martyr-like.
But you’ve caught cold: I saw you shivering, and you must have some gruel to drive it out.”

The worthy woman bustled off, and I crouched nearer the fire; my head felt hot, and the rest of me chill: moreover, I was excited, almost to a pitch of foolishness, through my nerves and brain.
He, poor man, was perfectly aghast at the spectacle of Catherine seated on the same bench with Hareton Earnshaw, leaning her hand on his shoulder; and confounded at his favourite’s endurance of her proximity: it affected him too deeply to allow an observation on the subject that night.
“Yes,” she said, “it is a pretty place; but I fear it will be getting out of order, unless Mr. Rochester should take it into his head to come and reside here permanently; or, at least, visit it rather oftener: great houses and fine grounds require the presence of the proprietor.”

“Mr.
On the hill-top above me sat the rising moon; pale yet as a cloud, but brightening momentarily, she looked over Hay, which, half lost in trees, sent up a blue smoke from its few chimneys: it was yet a mile distant, but in the absolute hush I could hear plainly its thin murmurs of life.
The head of my bed was near the door, and I thought at first the goblin-laugher stood at my bedside—or rather, crouched by my pillow: but I rose, looked round, and could see nothing; while, as I still gazed, the unnatural sound was reiterated: and I knew it came from behind the panels.
The utmost I hope is, to save money enough out of my earnings to set up a school some day in a little house rented by myself.”

“A mean nutriment for the spirit to exist on: and sitting in that window-seat (you see I know your habits)—”

“You have learned them from the servants.”

“Ah!
Soft scene, daring demonstration, I would not have; and I stood in peril of both: a weapon of defence must be prepared—I whetted my tongue: as he reached me, I asked with asperity, “whom he was going to marry now?”

“That was a strange question to be put by his darling Jane.”

“Indeed!
He sat down; for half-an-hour we never spoke; neither he to me nor I to him: that interval past, he recommenced—

“Jane, I go in six weeks; I have taken my berth in an East Indiaman which sails on the 20th of June.”

“God will protect you; for you have undertaken His work,” I answered.
Again I tell you it is not the insignificant private individual—the mere man, with the man’s selfish senses—I wish to mate: it is the missionary.”

“And I will give the missionary my energies—it is all he wants—but not myself: that would be only adding the husk and shell to the kernel.
I heard you; and I heard you turning over the dictionary to seek out the hard words, and then cursing because you couldn’t read their explanations!”

The young man evidently thought it too bad that he should be laughed at for his ignorance, and then laughed at for trying to remove it.
That forest-dell, where Lowood lay, was the cradle of fog and fog-bred pestilence; which, quickening with the quickening spring, crept into the Orphan Asylum, breathed typhus through its crowded schoolroom and dormitory, and, ere May arrived, transformed the seminary into an hospital.
A reception of finished politeness would probably have confused me: I could not have returned or repaid it by answering grace and elegance on my part; but harsh caprice laid me under no obligation; on the contrary, a decent quiescence, under the freak of manner, gave me the advantage.
I looked, and had an acute pleasure in looking,—a precious yet poignant pleasure; pure gold, with a steely point of agony: a pleasure like what the thirst-perishing man might feel who knows the well to which he has crept is poisoned, yet stoops and drinks divine draughts nevertheless.
What it was, whether beast or human being, one could not, at first sight, tell: it grovelled, seemingly, on all fours; it snatched and growled like some strange wild animal: but it was covered with clothing, and a quantity of dark, grizzled hair, wild as a mane, hid its head and face.
The house cleared, I shut myself in, fastened the bolt that none might intrude, and proceeded—not to weep, not to mourn, I was yet too calm for that, but—mechanically to take off the wedding dress, and replace it by the stuff gown I had worn yesterday, as I thought, for the last time.
We know that God is everywhere; but certainly we feel His presence most when His works are on the grandest scale spread before us; and it is in the unclouded night-sky, where His worlds wheel their silent course, that we read clearest His infinitude, His omnipotence, His omnipresence.
Hopeless of the future, I wished but this—that my Maker had that night thought good to require my soul of me while I slept; and that this weary frame, absolved by death from further conflict with fate, had now but to decay quietly, and mingle in peace with the soil of this wilderness.
Fancy me yielding and melting, as I am doing: human love rising like a freshly opened fountain in my mind and overflowing with sweet inundation all the field I have so carefully and with such labour prepared—so assiduously sown with the seeds of good intentions, of self-denying plans.
A perhaps uncalled-for gush of pity came over my heart: I was moved to say—

“I wish Diana or Mary would come and live with you: it is too bad that you should be quite alone; and you are recklessly rash about your own health.”

“Not at all,” said he: “I care for myself when necessary.
People familiar with these moors often miss their road on such evenings; and I can tell you there is no chance of a change at present.”

“Perhaps I can get a guide among your lads, and he might stay at the Grange till morning—could you spare me one?”

“No, I could not.”

“Oh, indeed!
“No, I was told the curate should have his —— teeth dashed down his —— throat, if he stepped over the threshold—Heathcliff had promised that!”

I put the orange in his hand, and bade him tell his father that a woman called Nelly Dean was waiting to speak with him, by the garden gate.
This is not much connected with Miss Isabella’s affair: except that it urged me to resolve further on mounting vigilant guard, and doing my utmost to check the spread of such bad influence at the Grange: even though I should wake a domestic storm, by thwarting Mrs. Linton’s pleasure.
He neither spoke nor loosed his hold for some five minutes, during which period he bestowed more kisses than ever he gave in his life before, I daresay: but then my mistress had kissed him first, and I plainly saw that he could hardly bear, for downright agony, to look into her face!
It’s a pity Earnshaw is not his match in strength: I wouldn’t have run till I’d seen him all but demolished, had Hindley been able to do it!”

“Well, don’t talk so fast, Miss!” I interrupted; “you’ll disorder the handkerchief I have tied round your face, and make the cut bleed again.
Go in by the shrubbery, through that wicket.”

As I went one way, he went another, and I heard him in the yard, saying cheerfully—

“Mason got the start of you all this morning; he was gone before sunrise: I rose at four to see him off.”

CHAPTER XXI
Presentiments are strange things!
I have many inducements to do so.”

“Did you find your scholars as attentive as you expected?”

“Quite.”

“Do you like your house?”

“Very much.”

“Have I furnished it nicely?”

“Very nicely, indeed.”

“And made a good choice of an attendant for you in Alice Wood?”

“You have indeed.
Edgar, is there not a south wind, and is not the snow almost gone?”

“The snow is quite gone down here, darling,” replied her husband; “and I only see two white spots on the whole range of moors: the sky is blue, and the larks are singing, and the becks and brooks are all brim full.
I could not picture a father treating a dying child as tyrannically and wickedly as I afterwards learned Heathcliff had treated him, to compel this apparent eagerness: his efforts redoubling the more imminently his avaricious and unfeeling plans were threatened with defeat by death.
Superstition was with me at that moment; but it was not yet her hour for complete victory: my blood was still warm; the mood of the revolted slave was still bracing me with its bitter vigour; I had to stem a rapid rush of retrospective thought before I quailed to the dismal present.
True, reader; and I knew and felt this: and though I am a defective being, with many faults and few redeeming points, yet I never tired of Helen Burns; nor ever ceased to cherish for her a sentiment of attachment, as strong, tender, and respectful as any that ever animated my heart.
Miss Temple, through all changes, had thus far continued superintendent of the seminary: to her instruction I owed the best part of my acquirements; her friendship and society had been my continual solace; she had stood me in the stead of mother, governess, and, latterly, companion.
I thought when the coach stopped here there would be some one to meet me; I looked anxiously round as I descended the wooden steps the “boots” placed for my convenience, expecting to hear my name pronounced, and to see some description of carriage waiting to convey me to Thornfield.
You go to-morrow, then?”

“Yes, sir; early.”

“Shall you come down to the drawing-room after dinner?”

“No, sir, I must prepare for the journey.”

“Then you and I must bid good-bye for a little while?”

“I suppose so, sir.”

“And how do people perform that ceremony of parting, Jane?
“Because,” he said, “I sometimes have a queer feeling with regard to you—especially when you are near me, as now: it is as if I had a string somewhere under my left ribs, tightly and inextricably knotted to a similar string situated in the corresponding quarter of your little frame.
“I will attire my Jane in satin and lace, and she shall have roses in her hair; and I will cover the head I love best with a priceless veil.”

“And then you won’t know me, sir; and I shall not be your Jane Eyre any longer, but an ape in a harlequin’s jacket—a jay in borrowed plumes.
From a flowery arch at the bottom of my garden I gazed over the sea—bluer than the sky: the old world was beyond; clear prospects opened thus:—

“‘Go,’ said Hope, ‘and live again in Europe: there it is not known what a sullied name you bear, nor what a filthy burden is bound to you.
He seemed to think I had committed an impropriety in proposing to accompany him unmarried: as if I had not from the first hoped to find in him a brother, and habitually regarded him as such.”

“What makes you say he does not love you, Jane?”

“You should hear himself on the subject.
Violent as he had seemed in his despair, he, in truth, loved me far too well and too tenderly to constitute himself my tyrant: he would have given me half his fortune, without demanding so much as a kiss in return, rather than I should have flung myself friendless on the wide world.
I can’t scale the ramparts on this side!”

“Stay where you are,” I answered; “I have my bundle of keys in my pocket: perhaps I may manage to open it; if not, I’ll go.”

Catherine amused herself with dancing to and fro before the door, while I tried all the large keys in succession.
He is not tolerably well, as he told me to tell papa; but he’s better, very likely.”

“There you differ with me, Miss Cathy,” I remarked; “I should conjecture him to be far worse.”

Linton here started from his slumber in bewildered terror, and asked if any one had called his name.
and,’ said she, ‘they looked at my dress and mama’s, as if they had never seen a silk gown before.’”

“This is the state of things I quite approve,” returned Mrs. Reed; “had I sought all England over, I could scarcely have found a system more exactly fitting a child like Jane Eyre.
I was carried into an inn, where the guard wanted me to have some dinner; but, as I had no appetite, he left me in an immense room with a fireplace at each end, a chandelier pendent from the ceiling, and a little red gallery high up against the wall filled with musical instruments.
There was now visible a house or houses—for the building spread far—with many windows, and lights burning in some; we went up a broad pebbly path, splashing wet, and were admitted at a door; then the servant led me through a passage into a room with a fire, where she left me alone.
To-night I was to be Miss Miller’s bed-fellow; she helped me to undress: when laid down I glanced at the long rows of beds, each of which was quickly filled with two occupants; in ten minutes the single light was extinguished, and amidst silence and complete darkness I fell asleep.
Yes—yes—the end is not so difficult; if I had only a brain active enough to ferret out the means of attaining it.”

I sat up in bed by way of arousing this said brain: it was a chilly night; I covered my shoulders with a shawl, and then I proceeded to think again with all my might.
Little girl, a memory without blot or contamination must be an exquisite treasure—an inexhaustible source of pure refreshment: is it not?”

“How was your memory when you were eighteen, sir?”

“All right then; limpid, salubrious: no gush of bilge water had turned it to fetid puddle.
“And old Madam Reed, or the Misses, her daughters, will be solicited by you to seek a place, I suppose?”

“No, sir; I am not on such terms with my relatives as would justify me in asking favours of them—but I shall advertise.”

“You shall walk up the pyramids of Egypt!” he growled.
Above, a chamber of the same dimensions as the kitchen, with a deal bedstead and chest of drawers; small, yet too large to be filled with my scanty wardrobe: though the kindness of my gentle and generous friends has increased that, by a modest stock of such things as are necessary.
The night before he left home, happening to see him walking in the garden about sunset, and remembering, as I looked at him, that this man, alienated as he now was, had once saved my life, and that we were near relations, I was moved to make a last attempt to regain his friendship.
“I’ll not work any more to-day: I’ll stay with you.”

“Oh, but Joseph will tell,” she suggested; “you’d better go!”

“Joseph is loading lime on the further side of Penistone Crags; it will take him till dark, and he’ll never know.”

So saying, he lounged to the fire, and sat down.
What are you on the point of complaining about, Heathcliff?”

“Nothing—only look at the almanack on that wall;” he pointed to a framed sheet hanging near the window, and continued, “The crosses are for the evenings you have spent with the Lintons, the dots for those spent with me.
You needn’t laugh; for I’ve just crammed Kenneth, head-downmost, in the Black-horse marsh; and two is the same as one—and I want to kill some of you: I shall have no rest till I do!”

“But I don’t like the carving-knife, Mr. Hindley,” I answered; “it has been cutting red herrings.
I niver did think to see t’ day that I mud lave th’ owld place—but I doubt it’s nigh at hand!”

This lamentation drew no notice from me: I went briskly to work, sighing to remember a period when it would have been all merry fun; but compelled speedily to drive off the remembrance.
Earnshaw was not to be civilized with a wish, and my young lady was no philosopher, and no paragon of patience; but both their minds tending to the same point—one loving and desiring to esteem, and the other loving and desiring to be esteemed—they contrived in the end to reach it.
“No; they occupy a range of smaller apartments to the back; no one ever sleeps here: one would almost say that, if there were a ghost at Thornfield Hall, this would be its haunt.”

“So I think: you have no ghost, then?”

“None that I ever heard of,” returned Mrs. Fairfax, smiling.
When once more alone, I reviewed the information I had got; looked into my heart, examined its thoughts and feelings, and endeavoured to bring back with a strict hand such as had been straying through imagination’s boundless and trackless waste, into the safe fold of common sense.
Only one hour in the twenty-four did she pass with her fellow-servants below; all the rest of her time was spent in some low-ceiled, oaken chamber of the second storey: there she sat and sewed—and probably laughed drearily to herself,—as companionless as a prisoner in his dungeon.
A joyous stir was now audible in the hall: gentlemen’s deep tones and ladies’ silvery accents blent harmoniously together, and distinguishable above all, though not loud, was the sonorous voice of the master of Thornfield Hall, welcoming his fair and gallant guests under its roof.
John?”

“Yes.”

“And how does his mother bear it?”

“Why, you see, Miss Eyre, it is not a common mishap: his life has been very wild: these last three years he gave himself up to strange ways, and his death was shocking.”

“I heard from Bessie he was not doing well.”

“Doing well!
Will you rest yourself here an hour, Miss, and then I will go up with you?”

Robert here entered, and Bessie laid her sleeping child in the cradle and went to welcome him: afterwards she insisted on my taking off my bonnet and having some tea; for she said I looked pale and tired.
You must share it with her to-night, Jane: it is no wonder that the incident you have related should make you nervous, and I would rather you did not sleep alone: promise me to go to the nursery.”

“I shall be very glad to do so, sir.”

“And fasten the door securely on the inside.
You may choose what you like: only let it be little, for I shall walk there and back: sixty miles each way, that is a long spell!” Hindley named a fiddle, and then he asked Miss Cathy; she was hardly six years old, but she could ride any horse in the stable, and she chose a whip.
I wish I had light hair and a fair skin, and was dressed and behaved as well, and had a chance of being as rich as he will be!”

“And cried for mamma at every turn,” I added, “and trembled if a country lad heaved his fist against you, and sat at home all day for a shower of rain.
I’ve persuaded my conscience that it was a duty to warn him how people talked regarding his ways; and then I’ve recollected his confirmed bad habits, and, hopeless of benefiting him, have flinched from re-entering the dismal house, doubting if I could bear to be taken at my word.
She certainly seemed in no laughing predicament: her hair streamed on her shoulders, dripping with snow and water; she was dressed in the girlish dress she commonly wore, befitting her age more than her position: a low frock with short sleeves, and nothing on either head or neck.
Necessity compelled me to seek shelter here; though, if I had not learned he was out of the way, I’d have halted at the kitchen, washed my face, warmed myself, got you to bring what I wanted, and departed again to anywhere out of the reach of my accursed—of that incarnate goblin!
The guest was now the master of Wuthering Heights: he held firm possession, and proved to the attorney—who, in his turn, proved it to Mr. Linton—that Earnshaw had mortgaged every yard of land he owned for cash to supply his mania for gaming; and he, Heathcliff, was the mortgagee.
“I didn’t mean to take them; but papa told me there were quantities up here, and I wished to see the eggs.”

Heathcliff glanced at me with an ill-meaning smile, expressing his acquaintance with the party, and, consequently, his malevolence towards it, and demanded who “papa” was?
And—and, if you did meet my father, and he asked you about me, don’t lead him to suppose that I’ve been extremely silent and stupid: don’t look sad and downcast, as you are doing—he’ll be angry.”

“I care nothing for his anger,” exclaimed Cathy, imagining she would be its object.
I felt rather confused at being the object of more attention than I had ever before received, and, that too, shown by my employer and superior; but as she did not herself seem to consider she was doing anything out of her place, I thought it better to take her civilities quietly.
and is Mrs. Fairfax with him?”

“Yes, and Miss Adèle; they are in the dining-room, and John is gone for a surgeon; for master has had an accident; his horse fell and his ankle is sprained.”

“Did the horse fall in Hay Lane?”

“Yes, coming down-hill; it slipped on some ice.”

“Ah!
Bring me a candle will you Leah?”

Leah brought it; she entered, followed by Mrs. Fairfax, who repeated the news; adding that Mr. Carter the surgeon was come, and was now with Mr. Rochester: then she hurried out to give orders about tea, and I went upstairs to take off my things.
Leah had been saying something I had not caught, and the charwoman remarked—

“She gets good wages, I guess?”

“Yes,” said Leah; “I wish I had as good; not that mine are to complain of,—there’s no stinginess at Thornfield; but they’re not one fifth of the sum Mrs. Poole receives.
I could talk a while when the evening commenced, but the first gush of vivacity and fluency gone, I was fain to sit on a stool at Diana’s feet, to rest my head on her knee, and listen alternately to her and Mary, while they sounded thoroughly the topic on which I had but touched.
My hopes of being numbered in the band who have merged all ambitions in the glorious one of bettering their race—of carrying knowledge into the realms of ignorance—of substituting peace for war—freedom for bondage—religion for superstition—the hope of heaven for the fear of hell?
“You’d better do it at once,” he persisted, escaping to the porch (they were in the stable): “you will have to: and if I speak of these blows, you’ll get them again with interest.” “Off, dog!” cried Hindley, threatening him with an iron weight used for weighing potatoes and hay.
Certainly she had ways with her such as I never saw a child take up before; and she put all of us past our patience fifty times and oftener in a day: from the hour she came downstairs till the hour she went to bed, we had not a minute’s security that she wouldn’t be in mischief.
And don’t harass him much by talking: let him be quiet this evening, at least, will you?”

“Yes, yes, papa,” answered Catherine: “but I do want to see him; and he hasn’t once looked out.”

The carriage stopped; and the sleeper being roused, was lifted to the ground by his uncle.
He divined that one of his enemy’s purposes was to secure the personal property, as well as the estate, to his son: or rather himself; yet why he did not wait till his decease was a puzzle to my master, because ignorant how nearly he and his nephew would quit the world together.
“My Uncle Reed is in heaven, and can see all you do and think; and so can papa and mama: they know how you shut me up all day long, and how you wish me dead.”

Mrs. Reed soon rallied her spirits: she shook me most soundly, she boxed both my ears, and then left me without a word.
I had the means of an excellent education placed within my reach; a fondness for some of my studies, and a desire to excel in all, together with a great delight in pleasing my teachers, especially such as I loved, urged me on: I availed myself fully of the advantages offered me.
The impulse of gratitude swelled my heart, and I knelt down at the bedside, and offered up thanks where thanks were due; not forgetting, ere I rose, to implore aid on my further path, and the power of meriting the kindness which seemed so frankly offered me before it was earned.
It was strange: a bold, vindictive, and haughty gentleman seemed somehow in the power of one of the meanest of his dependents; so much in her power, that even when she lifted her hand against his life, he dared not openly charge her with the attempt, much less punish her for it.
Old times crowded fast back on me as I watched her bustling about—setting out the tea-tray with her best china, cutting bread and butter, toasting a tea-cake, and, between whiles, giving little Robert or Jane an occasional tap or push, just as she used to give me in former days.
The day will close almost before you are aware it has begun; and you are indebted to no one for helping you to get rid of one vacant moment: you have had to seek no one’s company, conversation, sympathy, forbearance; you have lived, in short, as an independent being ought to do.
“Well, whatever my sufferings had been, they were very short,” I answered: and then I proceeded to tell him how I had been received at Moor House; how I had obtained the office of schoolmistress, &c. The accession of fortune, the discovery of my relations, followed in due order.
The little souls were comforting each other with better thoughts than I could have hit on: no parson in the world ever pictured heaven so beautifully as they did, in their innocent talk; and, while I sobbed and listened, I could not help wishing we were all there safe together.
He bled her, and he told me to let her live on whey and water-gruel, and take care she did not throw herself downstairs or out of the window; and then he left: for he had enough to do in the parish, where two or three miles was the ordinary distance between cottage and cottage.
He went up the walk, and entered the house; but, instead of Hindley, Heathcliff appeared on the door-stones; and I turned directly and ran down the road as hard as ever I could race, making no halt till I gained the guide-post, and feeling as scared as if I had raised a goblin.
However, I took care there should be no further scorning at my good nature: ever since, I’ve been as stiff as herself; and she has no lover or liker among us: and she does not deserve one; for, let them say the least word to her, and she’ll curl back without respect of any one.
I remember her as a slim young woman, with black hair, dark eyes, very nice features, and good, clear complexion; but she had a capricious and hasty temper, and indifferent ideas of principle or justice: still, such as she was, I preferred her to any one else at Gateshead Hall.
A picturesque track it was, by the way; lying along the side of the beck and through the sweetest curves of the dale: but that day I thought more of the letters, that might or might not be awaiting me at the little burgh whither I was bound, than of the charms of lea and water.
I lingered in the long passage to which this led, separating the front and back rooms of the third storey: narrow, low, and dim, with only one little window at the far end, and looking, with its two rows of small black doors all shut, like a corridor in some Bluebeard’s castle.
“Strange that I should choose you for the confidant of all this, young lady; passing strange that you should listen to me quietly, as if it were the most usual thing in the world for a man like me to tell stories of his opera-mistresses to a quaint, inexperienced girl like you!
Their visit was not so still as Miss Ingram’s had been: we heard hysterical giggling and little shrieks proceeding from the library; and at the end of about twenty minutes they burst the door open, and came running across the hall, as if they were half-scared out of their wits.
The doctor says she may linger a week or two yet; but he hardly thinks she will finally recover.”

“Has she mentioned me lately?”

“She was talking of you only this morning, and wishing you would come, but she is sleeping now, or was ten minutes ago, when I was up at the house.
I began once more to know myself; and when Mr. St. John demanded an account—which at present I was far too weak to render—I said after a brief pause—

“Sir, I can give you no details to-night.”

“But what, then,” said he, “do you expect me to do for you?”

“Nothing,” I replied.
Will you be this mistress?”

He put the question rather hurriedly; he seemed half to expect an indignant, or at least a disdainful rejection of the offer: not knowing all my thoughts and feelings, though guessing some, he could not tell in what light the lot would appear to me.
I engaged to carry a letter from him to my mistress; and should she consent, I promised to let him have intelligence of Linton’s next absence from home, when he might come, and get in as he was able: I wouldn’t be there, and my fellow-servants should be equally out of the way.
I vainly reminded him of his protracted abstinence from food: if he stirred to touch anything in compliance with my entreaties, if he stretched his hand out to get a piece of bread, his fingers clenched before they reached it, and remained on the table, forgetful of their aim.
You may tell Miss Smith that I forgot to make a memorandum of the darning needles, but she shall have some papers sent in next week; and she is not, on any account, to give out more than one at a time to each pupil: if they have more, they are apt to be careless and lose them.
She made reasonable progress, entertained for me a vivacious, though perhaps not very profound, affection; and by her simplicity, gay prattle, and efforts to please, inspired me, in return, with a degree of attachment sufficient to make us both content in each other’s society.
A deal of people, Miss, are for trusting all to Providence; but I say Providence will not dispense with the means, though He often blesses them when they are used discreetly.” And here she closed her harangue: a long one for her, and uttered with the demureness of a Quakeress.
It was a wailing child this night, and a laughing one the next: now it nestled close to me, and now it ran from me; but whatever mood the apparition evinced, whatever aspect it wore, it failed not for seven successive nights to meet me the moment I entered the land of slumber.
I had some trouble in finding an attendant for her, as it was necessary to select one on whose fidelity dependence could be placed; for her ravings would inevitably betray my secret: besides, she had lucid intervals of days—sometimes weeks—which she filled up with abuse of me.
and what do you wish to know now?”

“Whether you found any one you liked: whether you asked her to marry you; and what she said.”

“I can tell you whether I found any one I liked, and whether I asked her to marry me: but what she said is yet to be recorded in the book of Fate.
He who is taken out to pass through a fair scene to the scaffold, thinks not of the flowers that smile on his road, but of the block and axe-edge; of the disseverment of bone and vein; of the grave gaping at the end: and I thought of drear flight and homeless wandering—and oh!
No weather seemed to hinder him in these pastoral excursions: rain or fair, he would, when his hours of morning study were over, take his hat, and, followed by his father’s old pointer, Carlo, go out on his mission of love or duty—I scarcely know in which light he regarded it.
The same lady pays for the education and clothing of an orphan from the workhouse, on condition that she shall aid the mistress in such menial offices connected with her own house and the school as her occupation of teaching will prevent her having time to discharge in person.
For the doom which had reft me from adhesion to my master: for him I was no more to see; for the desperate grief and fatal fury—consequences of my departure—which might now, perhaps, be dragging him from the path of right, too far to leave hope of ultimate restoration thither.
It is a dream; such dreams as I have had at night when I have clasped her once more to my heart, as I do now; and kissed her, as thus—and felt that she loved me, and trusted that she would not leave me.”

“Which I never will, sir, from this day.”

“Never will, says the vision?
Miss Cathy and he were now very thick; but Hindley hated him: and to say the truth I did the same; and we plagued and went on with him shamefully: for I wasn’t reasonable enough to feel my injustice, and the mistress never put in a word on his behalf when she saw him wronged.
I left her because she would not hold her tongue; and she must—tell her Mr. Kenneth says she must be quiet.”

I delivered this message to Mrs. Earnshaw; she seemed in flighty spirits, and replied merrily, “I hardly spoke a word, Ellen, and there he has gone out twice, crying.
“As bad as any marred child: you’d better be riding home, or else she will be sick, only to grieve us.”

The soft thing looked askance through the window: he possessed the power to depart as much as a cat possesses the power to leave a mouse half killed, or a bird half eaten.
It appeared dry and cold; but at the bottom was dotted in with pencil an obscure apology, and an entreaty for kind remembrance and reconciliation, if her proceeding had offended him: asserting that she could not help it then, and being done, she had now no power to repeal it.
After a short suspense, it was opened by a tall, gaunt man, without neckerchief, and otherwise extremely slovenly; his features were lost in masses of shaggy hair that hung on his shoulders; and his eyes, too, were like a ghostly Catherine’s with all their beauty annihilated.
On reaching it, the astonishment of my fellow-servants to see me, and their joy also, was intense; and when they heard that their little mistress was safe, two or three were about to hurry up and shout the news at Mr. Edgar’s door: but I bespoke the announcement of it myself.
I will never come to see you when I am grown up; and if any one asks me how I liked you, and how you treated me, I will say the very thought of you makes me sick, and that you treated me with miserable cruelty.”

“How dare you affirm that, Jane Eyre?”

“How dare I, Mrs. Reed?
Ravenous, and now very faint, I devoured a spoonful or two of my portion without thinking of its taste; but the first edge of hunger blunted, I perceived I had got in hand a nauseous mess; burnt porridge is almost as bad as rotten potatoes; famine itself soon sickens over it.
The stronger among the girls ran about and engaged in active games, but sundry pale and thin ones herded together for shelter and warmth in the verandah; and amongst these, as the dense mist penetrated to their shivering frames, I heard frequently the sound of a hollow cough.
Within the arch, the bulky figure of Sir George Lynn, whom Mr. Rochester had likewise chosen, was seen enveloped in a white sheet: before him, on a table, lay open a large book; and at his side stood Amy Eshton, draped in Mr. Rochester’s cloak, and holding a book in her hand.
This girl,” he continued, looking at me, “knew no more than you, Wood, of the disgusting secret: she thought all was fair and legal; and never dreamt she was going to be entrapped into a feigned union with a defrauded wretch, already bound to a bad, mad, and embruted partner!
sir, she sees you!” exclaimed Grace: “you’d better not stay.”

“Only a few moments, Grace: you must allow me a few moments.”

“Take care then, sir!—for God’s sake, take care!”

The maniac bellowed: she parted her shaggy locks from her visage, and gazed wildly at her visitors.
I was an intellectual epicure, and wished to prolong the gratification of making this novel and piquant acquaintance: besides, I was for a while troubled with a haunting fear that if I handled the flower freely its bloom would fade—the sweet charm of freshness would leave it.
These opinions he delivered in a few words, in a quiet, low voice; and added, after a pause, in the tone of a man little accustomed to expansive comment, “Rather an unusual physiognomy; certainly, not indicative of vulgarity or degradation.”

“Far otherwise,” responded Diana.
I must not forget that these coarsely-clad little peasants are of flesh and blood as good as the scions of gentlest genealogy; and that the germs of native excellence, refinement, intelligence, kind feeling, are as likely to exist in their hearts as in those of the best-born.
The ——th regiment are stationed there since the riots; and the officers are the most agreeable men in the world: they put all our young knife-grinders and scissor merchants to shame.”

It seemed to me that Mr. St. John’s under lip protruded, and his upper lip curled a moment.
“But I apprised you that I was a hard man,” said he, “difficult to persuade.”

“And I am a hard woman,—impossible to put off.”

And I am a hard woman,—impossible to put off
“And then,” he pursued, “I am cold: no fervour infects me.”

“Whereas I am hot, and fire dissolves ice.
She lifted the letter, and seemed to peruse it; and when she came to the signature she sighed: yet still I found she had not gathered its import, for, upon my desiring to hear her reply, she merely pointed to the name, and gazed at me with mournful and questioning eagerness.
My young mistress alighted, and told me that, as she was resolved to stay a very little while, I had better hold the pony and remain on horseback; but I dissented: I wouldn’t risk losing sight of the charge committed to me a minute; so we climbed the slope of heath together.
“Now I suppose we shall know whether we are to expect his return or not.”

And while she broke the seal and perused the document, I went on taking my coffee (we were at breakfast): it was hot, and I attributed to that circumstance a fiery glow which suddenly rose to my face.
I felt glad as the road shortened before me: so glad that I stopped once to ask myself what that joy meant: and to remind reason that it was not to my home I was going, or to a permanent resting-place, or to a place where fond friends looked out for me and waited my arrival.
“That I am not Edward Rochester’s bride is the least part of my woe,” I alleged: “that I have wakened out of most glorious dreams, and found them all void and vain, is a horror I could bear and master; but that I must leave him decidedly, instantly, entirely, is intolerable.
Mr. Briggs, being Mr. Eyre’s solicitor, wrote to us last August to inform us of our uncle’s death, and to say that he had left his property to his brother the clergyman’s orphan daughter, overlooking us, in consequence of a quarrel, never forgiven, between him and my father.
Possibly, some people might suspect him of a degree of under-bred pride; I have a sympathetic chord within that tells me it is nothing of the sort: I know, by instinct, his reserve springs from an aversion to showy displays of feeling—to manifestations of mutual kindliness.
The service lasted precisely three hours; and yet my brother had the face to exclaim, when he saw us descending, ‘What, done already?’ On Sunday evenings we used to be permitted to play, if we did not make much noise; now a mere titter is sufficient to send us into corners.
Such honour have all His saints!”

With that concluding word, the whole assembly, exalting their pilgrim’s staves, rushed round me in a body; and I, having no weapon to raise in self-defence, commenced grappling with Joseph, my nearest and most ferocious assailant, for his.
I did remark, to be sure, that mounting the stairs made her breathe very quick; that the least sudden noise set her all in a quiver, and that she coughed troublesomely sometimes: but I knew nothing of what these symptoms portended, and had no impulse to sympathise with her.
I am neither come to wrangle nor be reconciled; but I wish just to learn whether, after this evening’s events, you intend to continue your intimacy with—”

“Oh, for mercy’s sake,” interrupted the mistress, stamping her foot, “for mercy’s sake, let us hear no more of it now!
Hareton and the woman laughed, and she joined them, and waxed more impertinent still; till I cried, in great irritation,—“Well, Miss Cathy, if you were aware whose house this is you’d be glad enough to get out.”

“It’s your father’s, isn’t it?” said she, turning to Hareton.
But this is not to be a regular autobiography: I am only bound to invoke Memory where I know her responses will possess some degree of interest; therefore I now pass a space of eight years almost in silence: a few lines only are necessary to keep up the links of connection.
“The smile is very well,” said he, catching instantly the passing expression; “but speak too.”

“I was thinking, sir, that very few masters would trouble themselves to inquire whether or not their paid subordinates were piqued and hurt by their orders.”

“Paid subordinates!
She had Roman features and a double chin, disappearing into a throat like a pillar: these features appeared to me not only inflated and darkened, but even furrowed with pride; and the chin was sustained by the same principle, in a position of almost preternatural erectness.
“You blushed, and now you are white, Jane: what is that for?”

“Because you gave me a new name—Jane Rochester; and it seems so strange.”

“Yes, Mrs. Rochester,” said he; “young Mrs. Rochester—Fairfax Rochester’s girl-bride.”

“It can never be, sir; it does not sound likely.
But to the point if you please, sir—Miss Ingram?”

“Well, I feigned courtship of Miss Ingram, because I wished to render you as madly in love with me as I was with you; and I knew jealousy would be the best ally I could call in for the furtherance of that end.”

“Excellent!
Perfect beauty is a strong expression; but I do not retrace or qualify it: as sweet features as ever the temperate clime of Albion moulded; as pure hues of rose and lily as ever her humid gales and vapoury skies generated and screened, justified, in this instance, the term.
I never had a home, I never had brothers or sisters; I must and will have them now: you are not reluctant to admit me and own me, are you?”

“Jane, I will be your brother—my sisters will be your sisters—without stipulating for this sacrifice of your just rights.”

“Brother?
For heaven’s sake be quick, and let me settle somewhere!”

He made no reply to this adjuration; only plodding doggedly down the wooden steps, and halting, before an apartment which, from that halt and the superior quality of its furniture, I conjectured to be the best one.
“I didn’t tell him that.”

“You have been telling him something, then: you have written, have you?”

“To say that I was married, I did write—you saw the note.”

“And nothing since?”

“No.”

“My young lady is looking sadly the worse for her change of condition,” I remarked.
I could not remember him; but I knew that he was my own uncle—my mother’s brother—that he had taken me when a parentless infant to his house; and that in his last moments he had required a promise of Mrs. Reed that she would rear and maintain me as one of her own children.
What had just passed; what Mrs. Reed had said concerning me to Mr. Brocklehurst; the whole tenor of their conversation, was recent, raw, and stinging in my mind; I had felt every word as acutely as I had heard it plainly, and a passion of resentment fomented now within me.
Miss Miller signed to me to sit on a bench near the door, then walking up to the top of the long room she cried out—

“Monitors, collect the lesson-books and put them away!”

Four tall girls arose from different tables, and going round, gathered the books and removed them.
I looked in vain for her I had first seen the night before; she was not visible: Miss Miller occupied the foot of the table where I sat, and a strange, foreign-looking, elderly lady, the French teacher, as I afterwards found, took the corresponding seat at the other board.
It was English history: among the readers I observed my acquaintance of the verandah: at the commencement of the lesson, her place had been at the top of the class, but for some error of pronunciation, or some inattention to stops, she was suddenly sent to the very bottom.
There is not enough for three.”

Barbara went out: she returned soon—

“Madam, Mrs. Harden says she has sent up the usual quantity.”

Mrs. Harden, be it observed, was the housekeeper: a woman after Mr. Brocklehurst’s own heart, made up of equal parts of whalebone and iron.
“Keep out of the way,” said Mr. Rochester, thrusting her aside: “she has no knife now, I suppose, and I’m on my guard.”

“One never knows what she has, sir: she is so cunning: it is not in mortal discretion to fathom her craft.”

“We had better leave her,” whispered Mason.
I don’t want to marry, and never shall marry.”

“That is saying too much: such hazardous affirmations are a proof of the excitement under which you labour.”

“It is not saying too much: I know what I feel, and how averse are my inclinations to the bare thought of marriage.
As we advanced and left the track, we trod a soft turf, mossy fine and emerald green, minutely enamelled with a tiny white flower, and spangled with a star-like yellow blossom: the hills, meantime, shut us quite in; for the glen, towards its head, wound to their very core.
He pressed his hand firmer on my head, as if he claimed me: he surrounded me with his arm, almost as if he loved me (I say almost—I knew the difference—for I had felt what it was to be loved; but, like him, I had now put love out of the question, and thought only of duty).
Late that night—perhaps it might be between eleven and twelve o’clock—ere I retired to my dreary rest, I supplicated God, that, if it seemed good to Him, I might soon be taken from this life, and admitted to that world to come, where there was still hope of rejoining Jane.
They sit up all night together continually, and Hindley has been borrowing money on his land, and does nothing but play and drink: I heard only a week ago—it was Joseph who told me—I met him at Gimmerton: ‘Nelly,’ he said, ‘we’s hae a crowner’s ’quest enow, at ahr folks’.
It’s a mercy t’ bothom isn’t deaved out!”

It was rather a rough mess, I own, when poured into the basins; four had been provided, and a gallon pitcher of new milk was brought from the dairy, which Hareton seized and commenced drinking and spilling from the expansive lip.
After exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him, his cousin went to Mr. Heathcliff, who lingered by the door, dividing his attention between the objects inside and those that lay without: pretending, that is, to observe the latter, and really noting the former alone.
Whether Catherine had spent her tears, or whether the grief were too weighty to let them flow, she sat there dry-eyed till the sun rose: she sat till noon, and would still have remained brooding over that deathbed, but I insisted on her coming away and taking some repose.
The fact is, I was a trifle beside myself; or rather out of myself, as the French would say: I was conscious that a moment’s mutiny had already rendered me liable to strange penalties, and, like any other rebel slave, I felt resolved, in my desperation, to go all lengths.
If she had been in great pain one would have excused it, but she only wanted to bring us all here: I know her naughty tricks.”

“What is all this?” demanded another voice peremptorily; and Mrs. Reed came along the corridor, her cap flying wide, her gown rustling stormily.
Miss Miller again gave the word of command—

“Monitors, fetch the supper-trays!”

The tall girls went out and returned presently, each bearing a tray, with portions of something, I knew not what, arranged thereon, and a pitcher of water and mug in the middle of each tray.
It is past eleven o’clock: I heard it strike some minutes since.”

“I came to see you, Helen: I heard you were very ill, and I could not sleep till I had spoken to you.”

“You came to bid me good-bye, then: you are just in time probably.”

“Are you going somewhere, Helen?
Nothing else that has being would have been tolerable to me in the character of creditor for such an obligation: but you: it is different;—I feel your benefits no burden, Jane.”

He paused; gazed at me: words almost visible trembled on his lips,—but his voice was checked.
“It would be so much better,” she said, “if she could only get out of the way for a month or two, till all was over.” I did not ask what she meant by “all being over,” but I suppose she referred to the expected decease of her mother and the gloomy sequel of funeral rites.
It is only because our connection happens to be very transitory, and comes at a peculiarly mournful season, that I consent thus to render it so patient and compliant on my part.”

At last I saw Georgiana off; but now it was Eliza’s turn to request me to stay another week.
Of the fanatic’s burning eternity I have no fear: there is not a future state worse than this present one—let me break away, and go home to God!’

“I said this whilst I knelt down at, and unlocked a trunk which contained a brace of loaded pistols: I meant to shoot myself.
But no hint to that effect escaping him and his countenance becoming more overcast, I suddenly remembered that I might have been all wrong, and was perhaps playing the fool unwittingly; and I began gently to withdraw myself from his arms—but he eagerly snatched me closer.
He seemed a sullen, patient child; hardened, perhaps, to ill-treatment: he would stand Hindley’s blows without winking or shedding a tear, and my pinches moved him only to draw in a breath and open his eyes, as if he had hurt himself by accident, and nobody was to blame.
He was rather too indulgent in humouring her caprices; not from affection, but from pride: he wished earnestly to see her bring honour to the family by an alliance with the Lintons, and as long as she let him alone she might trample on us like slaves, for aught he cared!
You’d hear of odd things if I lived alone with that mawkish, waxen face: the most ordinary would be painting on its white the colours of the rainbow, and turning the blue eyes black, every day or two: they detestably resemble Linton’s.”

“Delectably!” observed Catherine.
I’m not wandering: you’re mistaken, or else I should believe you really were that withered hag, and I should think I was under Penistone Crags; and I’m conscious it’s night, and there are two candles on the table making the black press shine like jet.”

“The black press?
The first thing she saw me do, on coming out of the Grange, was to hang up her little dog; and when she pleaded for it, the first words I uttered were a wish that I had the hanging of every being belonging to her, except one: possibly she took that exception for herself.
Come away: as soon as he knows there is nobody by to care for his nonsense, he’ll be glad to lie still.”

She placed a cushion under his head, and offered him some water; he rejected the latter, and tossed uneasily on the former, as if it were a stone or a block of wood.
“What is your name besides Burns?”

“Helen.”

“Do you come a long way from here?”

“I come from a place farther north, quite on the borders of Scotland.”

“Will you ever go back?”

“I hope so; but nobody can be sure of the future.”

“You must wish to leave Lowood?”

“No!
Look here; to gain some real affection from you, or Miss Temple, or any other whom I truly love, I would willingly submit to have the bone of my arm broken, or to let a bull toss me, or to stand behind a kicking horse, and let it dash its hoof at my chest—”

“Hush, Jane!
He did not like to diminish the property by division, and yet he was anxious that Mr. Edward should have wealth, too, to keep up the consequence of the name; and, soon after he was of age, some steps were taken that were not quite fair, and made a great deal of mischief.
Why don’t you tremble?”

“I’m not cold.”

“Why don’t you turn pale?”

“I am not sick.”

“Why don’t you consult my art?”

“I’m not silly.”

The old crone “nichered” a laugh under her bonnet and bandage; she then drew out a short black pipe, and lighting it began to smoke.
I saw Mr. Rochester shudder: a singularly marked expression of disgust, horror, hatred, warped his countenance almost to distortion; but he only said—

“Come, be silent, Richard, and never mind her gibberish: don’t repeat it.”

“I wish I could forget it,” was the answer.
“It might pass for the present,” he said; “but he would yet see me glittering like a parterre.”

Glad was I to get him out of the silk warehouse, and then out of a jeweller’s shop: the more he bought me, the more my cheek burned with a sense of annoyance and degradation.
The lunatic is both cunning and malignant; she has never failed to take advantage of her guardian’s temporary lapses; once to secrete the knife with which she stabbed her brother, and twice to possess herself of the key of her cell, and issue therefrom in the night-time.
Some say there is enjoyment in looking back to painful experience past; but at this day I can scarcely bear to review the times to which I allude: the moral degradation, blent with the physical suffering, form too distressing a recollection ever to be willingly dwelt on.
How many minutes, for instance, had I devoted to studying the arrangement of this very room?—By-the-bye, could I tell him where such a book was?”

I showed him the volume on the shelf: he took it down, and withdrawing to his accustomed window recess, he began to read it.
He experienced no suffering from estrangement—no yearning after reconciliation; and though, more than once, my fast falling tears blistered the page over which we both bent, they produced no more effect on him than if his heart had been really a matter of stone or metal.
Each had enough decorum to suspend further hostilities: Heathcliff placed his fists, out of temptation, in his pockets; Mrs. Heathcliff curled her lip, and walked to a seat far off, where she kept her word by playing the part of a statue during the remainder of my stay.
There was a violent wind, as well as thunder, and either one or the other split a tree off at the corner of the building: a huge bough fell across the roof, and knocked down a portion of the east chimney-stack, sending a clatter of stones and soot into the kitchen-fire.
She wrote to inform her brother of the probable conclusion of a four-months’ indisposition under which she had suffered, and entreated him to come to her, if possible; for she had much to settle, and she wished to bid him adieu, and deliver Linton safely into his hands.
Hareton, recovering from his disgust at being taken for a servant, seemed moved by her distress; and, having fetched the pony round to the door, he took, to propitiate her, a fine crooked-legged terrier whelp from the kennel, and putting it into her hand, bid her whist!
I don’t love Mr. Heathcliff, though; and I dare not come when he returns: will he stay away many days?”

“Not many,” answered Linton; “but he goes on to the moors frequently, since the shooting season commenced; and you might spend an hour or two with me in his absence.
And though frequently, when she looked in to bid me good-night, I remarked a fresh colour in her cheeks and a pinkness over her slender fingers, instead of fancying the hue borrowed from a cold ride across the moors, I laid it to the charge of a hot fire in the library.
On fine evenings the latter followed his shooting expeditions, and Catherine yawned and sighed, and teased me to talk to her, and ran off into the court or garden the moment I began; and, as a last resource, cried, and said she was tired of living: her life was useless.
I overheard no further distinguishable talk, but, on looking round again, I perceived two such radiant countenances bent over the page of the accepted book, that I did not doubt the treaty had been ratified on both sides; and the enemies were, thenceforth, sworn allies.
I was comfortably revelling in the spring fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead, when my young lady, who had run down near the gate to procure some primrose roots for a border, returned only half laden, and informed us that Mr. Heathcliff was coming in.
He drew it nearer, and then rested his arms on the table, and looked at the opposite wall, as I supposed, surveying one particular portion, up and down, with glittering, restless eyes, and with such eager interest that he stopped breathing during half a minute together.
Jumping over forms, and creeping under tables, I made my way to one of the fire-places; there, kneeling by the high wire fender, I found Burns, absorbed, silent, abstracted from all round her by the companionship of a book, which she read by the dim glare of the embers.
My eye met his as the idea crossed my mind: he seemed to read the glance, answering as if its import had been spoken as well as imagined—

“Yes, yes, you are right,” said he; “I have plenty of faults of my own: I know it, and I don’t wish to palliate them, I assure you.
Rochester might probably win that noble lady’s love, if he chose to strive for it; is it likely he would waste a serious thought on this indigent and insignificant plebeian?’”

“I’ll do it,” I resolved: and having framed this determination, I grew calm, and fell asleep.
I climbed the thin wall with frantic perilous haste, eager to catch one glimpse of you from the top: the stones rolled from under my feet, the ivy branches I grasped gave way, the child clung round my neck in terror, and almost strangled me; at last I gained the summit.
I wish I could forget the roll of the red eyes and the fearful blackened inflation of the lineaments!”

“Ghosts are usually pale, Jane.”

“This, sir, was purple: the lips were swelled and dark; the brow furrowed: the black eyebrows widely raised over the bloodshot eyes.
There appeared, within three feet of him, a form clad in pure white—a youthful, graceful form: full, yet fine in contour; and when, after bending to caress Carlo, it lifted up its head, and threw back a long veil, there bloomed under his glance a face of perfect beauty.
She held her hand interposed between the furnace-heat and her eyes, and seemed absorbed in her occupation; desisting from it only to chide the servant for covering her with sparks, or to push away a dog, now and then, that snoozled its nose overforwardly into her face.
You are not so bewitched, ma’am, are you, as to remain with him of your own accord?”

“Take care, Ellen!” answered Isabella, her eyes sparkling irefully; there was no misdoubting by their expression the full success of her partner’s endeavours to make himself detested.
Now that she’s dead, I see her in Hindley: Hindley has exactly her eyes, if you had not tried to gouge them out, and made them black and red; and her—’

“‘Get up, wretched idiot, before I stamp you to death!’ he cried, making a movement that caused me to make one also.
CHAPTER XVIII
The twelve years, continued Mrs. Dean, following that dismal period were the happiest of my life: my greatest troubles in their passage rose from our little lady’s trifling illnesses, which she had to experience in common with all children, rich and poor.
“Her affection for him was still the chief sentiment in her heart; and he spoke without anger: he spoke in the deep tenderness of one about to leave his treasure amid perils and foes, where his remembered words would be the only aid that he could bequeath to guide her.
I supposed I should be condemned in Hareton Earnshaw’s heart, if not by his mouth, to the lowest pit in the infernal regions if I showed my unfortunate person in his neighbourhood then; and feeling very mean and malignant, I skulked round to seek refuge in the kitchen.
“Is it her Mr. Bates has been to see?”

“Yes.”

“And what does he say about her?”

“He says she’ll not be here long.”

This phrase, uttered in my hearing yesterday, would have only conveyed the notion that she was about to be removed to Northumberland, to her own home.
She went up to London last winter with her mama, and there everybody admired her, and a young lord fell in love with her: but his relations were against the match; and—what do you think?—he and Miss Georgiana made it up to run away; but they were found out and stopped.
I put down my muff on the stile, and went up to the tall steed; I endeavoured to catch the bridle, but it was a spirited thing, and would not let me come near its head; I made effort on effort, though in vain: meantime, I was mortally afraid of its trampling fore-feet.
Old Mr. Rochester and Mr. Rowland combined to bring Mr. Edward into what he considered a painful position, for the sake of making his fortune: what the precise nature of that position was I never clearly knew, but his spirit could not brook what he had to suffer in it.
Fluttering veils and waving plumes filled the vehicles; two of the cavaliers were young, dashing-looking gentlemen; the third was Mr. Rochester, on his black horse, Mesrour, Pilot bounding before him; at his side rode a lady, and he and she were the first of the party.
First, I wished to see whether her appearance accorded with Mrs. Fairfax’s description; secondly, whether it at all resembled the fancy miniature I had painted of her; and thirdly—it will out!—whether it were such as I should fancy likely to suit Mr. Rochester’s taste.
I found all the party in the dining-room at supper, as Mr. Rochester had said; they were not seated at table,—the supper was arranged on the sideboard; each had taken what he chose, and they stood about here and there in groups, their plates and glasses in their hands.
Adèle, as you say, must go to school; and you, of course, must march straight to—the devil?”

“I hope not, sir; but I must seek another situation somewhere.”

“In course!” he exclaimed, with a twang of voice and a distortion of features equally fantastic and ludicrous.
Mr. Rochester that night was absent from home; nor was he yet returned: business had called him to a small estate of two or three farms he possessed thirty miles off—business it was requisite he should settle in person, previous to his meditated departure from England.
I took hold of his clenched hand, loosened the contorted fingers, and said to him, soothingly—

“Sit down; I’ll talk to you as long as you like, and hear all you have to say, whether reasonable or unreasonable.”

He sat down: but he did not get leave to speak directly.
Moreover, I wished to see whether you would seek me if I shunned you—but you did not; you kept in the schoolroom as still as your own desk and easel; if by chance I met you, you passed me as soon, and with as little token of recognition, as was consistent with respect.
The strong blast and the soft breeze; the rough and the halcyon day; the hours of sunrise and sunset; the moonlight and the clouded night, developed for me, in these regions, the same attraction as for them—wound round my faculties the same spell that entranced theirs.
She talks of you continually: there is no subject she enjoys so much or touches upon so often.”

“It is very pleasant to hear this,” he said—“very: go on for another quarter of an hour.” And he actually took out his watch and laid it upon the table to measure the time.
His form was of the same strong and stalwart contour as ever: his port was still erect, his hair was still raven black; nor were his features altered or sunk: not in one year’s space, by any sorrow, could his athletic strength be quelled or his vigorous prime blighted.
Plants will grow about your roots, whether you ask them or not, because they take delight in your bountiful shadow; and as they grow they will lean towards you, and wind round you, because your strength offers them so safe a prop.”

Again he smiled: I gave him comfort.
They had invited them to spend the morrow at Wuthering Heights, and the invitation had been accepted, on one condition: Mrs. Linton begged that her darlings might be kept carefully apart from that “naughty swearing boy.”

Under these circumstances I remained solitary.
Don’t get the expression of a vicious cur that appears to know the kicks it gets are its dessert, and yet hates all the world, as well as the kicker, for what it suffers.”

“In other words, I must wish for Edgar Linton’s great blue eyes and even forehead,” he replied.
I could have told Heathcliff’s history, all that you need hear, in half a dozen words.”

* * * * *

Thus interrupting herself, the housekeeper rose, and proceeded to lay aside her sewing; but I felt incapable of moving from the hearth, and I was very far from nodding.
“For one thing, I have no father or mother, brothers or sisters.”

“You have a kind aunt and cousins.”

Again I paused; then bunglingly enounced—

“But John Reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up in the red-room.”

Mr. Lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.
and by what authority?”

“I must be responsible for the circumstance, sir,” replied Miss Temple: “the breakfast was so ill prepared that the pupils could not possibly eat it; and I dared not allow them to remain fasting till dinner-time.”

“Madam, allow me an instant.
I could not proceed to the schoolroom without passing some of their doors, and running the risk of being surprised with my cargo of victualage; so I stood still at this end, which, being windowless, was dark: quite dark now, for the sun was set and twilight gathering.
“Tant pis!” said her Ladyship, “I hope it may do her good!” Then, in a lower tone, but still loud enough for me to hear, “I noticed her; I am a judge of physiognomy, and in hers I see all the faults of her class.”

“What are they, madam?” inquired Mr. Rochester aloud.
She, too, was attired in oriental fashion: a crimson scarf tied sash-like round the waist: an embroidered handkerchief knotted about her temples; her beautifully-moulded arms bare, one of them upraised in the act of supporting a pitcher, poised gracefully on her head.
The matrons, meantime, offered vinaigrettes and wielded fans; and again and again reiterated the expression of their concern that their warning had not been taken in time; and the elder gentlemen laughed, and the younger urged their services on the agitated fair ones.
I must be served at the fireside, she said; and she placed before me a little round stand with my cup and a plate of toast, absolutely as she used to accommodate me with some privately purloined dainty on a nursery chair: and I smiled and obeyed her as in bygone days.
I stated before that I didn’t know how he gained his money; neither am I aware of the means he took to raise his mind from the savage ignorance into which it was sunk: but, with your leave, I’ll proceed in my own fashion, if you think it will amuse and not weary you.
As to her companion, while raising himself with one hand, he had taken her arm with the other; and so inadequate was his stock of gentleness to the requirements of her condition, that on his letting go I saw four distinct impressions left blue in the colourless skin.
A movement of Catherine’s relieved me a little presently: she put up her hand to clasp his neck, and bring her cheek to his as he held her; while he, in return, covering her with frantic caresses, said wildly—

“You teach me now how cruel you’ve been—cruel and false.
The villagers affirmed Mr. Heathcliff was near, and a cruel hard landlord to his tenants; but the house, inside, had regained its ancient aspect of comfort under female management, and the scenes of riot common in Hindley’s time were not now enacted within its walls.
She inquired how long they had been dead: then how old I was, what was my name, whether I could read, write, and sew a little: then she touched my cheek gently with her forefinger, and saying, “She hoped I should be a good child,” dismissed me along with Miss Miller.
“Oh!” I thought, “she is not going to die; they are mistaken: she could not speak and look so calmly if she were.”

I got on to her crib and kissed her: her forehead was cold, and her cheek both cold and thin, and so were her hand and wrist; but she smiled as of old.
Well, fetch me your portfolio, if you can vouch for its contents being original; but don’t pass your word unless you are certain: I can recognise patchwork.”

“Then I will say nothing, and you shall judge for yourself, sir.”

I brought the portfolio from the library.
I leave both the choice of subject and the manner of treating it entirely to yourself.”

Accordingly I sat and said nothing: “If he expects me to talk for the mere sake of talking and showing off, he will find he has addressed himself to the wrong person,” I thought.
Her plans required all her time and attention, she said; she was about to depart for some unknown bourne; and all day long she stayed in her own room, her door bolted within, filling trunks, emptying drawers, burning papers, and holding no communication with any one.
I’ll furnish my own wardrobe out of that money, and you shall give me nothing but—”

“Well, but what?”

“Your regard; and if I give you mine in return, that debt will be quit.”

“Well, for cool native impudence and pure innate pride, you haven’t your equal,” said he.
I lived with that woman upstairs four years, and before that time she had tried me indeed: her character ripened and developed with frightful rapidity; her vices sprang up fast and rank: they were so strong, only cruelty could check them, and I would not use cruelty.
I watch your career with interest, because I consider you a specimen of a diligent, orderly, energetic woman: not because I deeply compassionate what you have gone through, or what you still suffer.”

“You would describe yourself as a mere pagan philosopher,” I said.
As for me, I daily wished more to please him; but to do so, I felt daily more and more that I must disown half my nature, stifle half my faculties, wrest my tastes from their original bent, force myself to the adoption of pursuits for which I had no natural vocation.
There was the stile before me—the very fields through which I had hurried, blind, deaf, distracted with a revengeful fury tracking and scourging me, on the morning I fled from Thornfield: ere I well knew what course I had resolved to take, I was in the midst of them.
Catherine had seasons of gloom and silence now and then: they were respected with sympathising silence by her husband, who ascribed them to an alteration in her constitution, produced by her perilous illness; as she was never subject to depression of spirits before.
In the evening, she said, the evening of my visit to the Heights, I knew, as well as if I saw him, that Mr. Heathcliff was about the place; and I shunned going out, because I still carried his letter in my pocket, and didn’t want to be threatened or teased any more.
One traveller, the hound, being an old dog and fond of its ease, returned; but neither Cathy, nor the pony, nor the two pointers were visible in any direction: I despatched emissaries down this path, and that path, and at last went wandering in search of her myself.
I was going to the Grange one evening—a dark evening, threatening thunder—and, just at the turn of the Heights, I encountered a little boy with a sheep and two lambs before him; he was crying terribly; and I supposed the lambs were skittish, and would not be guided.
“You are like a murderer—you are like a slave-driver—you are like the Roman emperors!”

I had read Goldsmith’s History of Rome, and had formed my opinion of Nero, Caligula, &c. Also I had drawn parallels in silence, which I never thought thus to have declared aloud.
Why, in defiance of every precept and principle of this house, does she conform to the world so openly—here in an evangelical, charitable establishment—as to wear her hair one mass of curls?”

“Julia’s hair curls naturally,” returned Miss Temple, still more quietly.
Mrs. Fairfax said she should not be surprised if he were to go straight from the Leas to London, and thence to the Continent, and not show his face again at Thornfield for a year to come; he had not unfrequently quitted it in a manner quite as abrupt and unexpected.
I accept it, Jane; let the daughter have free advent—my arms wait to receive her.”

“Now, sir, proceed; what did you do when you found she was mad?”

“Jane, I approached the verge of despair; a remnant of self-respect was all that intervened between me and the gulf.
After all, justice permits you to keep it: you may, with a clear conscience, consider it absolutely your own.”

“With me,” said I, “it is fully as much a matter of feeling as of conscience: I must indulge my feelings; I so seldom have had an opportunity of doing so.
I love you better now, when I can really be useful to you, than I did in your state of proud independence, when you disdained every part but that of the giver and protector.”

“Hitherto I have hated to be helped—to be led: henceforth, I feel I shall hate it no more.
They met, and the master, irritated at seeing him clean and cheerful, or, perhaps, eager to keep his promise to Mrs. Linton, shoved him back with a sudden thrust, and angrily bade Joseph “keep the fellow out of the room—send him into the garret till dinner is over.
“She wishes to be out of my society now, at any rate!”

And he stared hard at the object of discourse, as one might do at a strange repulsive animal: a centipede from the Indies, for instance, which curiosity leads one to examine in spite of the aversion it raises.
An instant they held asunder, and then how they met I hardly saw, but Catherine made a spring, and he caught her, and they were locked in an embrace from which I thought my mistress would never be released alive: in fact, to my eyes, she seemed directly insensible.
That capacity for intense attachments reminded me of her mother: still she did not resemble her: for she could be soft and mild as a dove, and she had a gentle voice and pensive expression: her anger was never furious; her love never fierce: it was deep and tender.
Catherine’s face was just like the landscape—shadows and sunshine flitting over it in rapid succession; but the shadows rested longer, and the sunshine was more transient; and her poor little heart reproached itself for even that passing forgetfulness of its cares.
Though provided with a large library, I’m frequently very dull at the Grange; take my books away, and I should be desperate!”

“I was always reading, when I had them,” said Catherine; “and Mr. Heathcliff never reads; so he took it into his head to destroy my books.
It is a very strange sensation to inexperienced youth to feel itself quite alone in the world, cut adrift from every connection, uncertain whether the port to which it is bound can be reached, and prevented by many impediments from returning to that it has quitted.
They were fresh now as a succession of April showers and gleams, followed by a lovely spring morning, could make them: the sun was just entering the dappled east, and his light illumined the wreathed and dewy orchard trees and shone down the quiet walks under them.
He took it up with a snatch; he looked at the edge; then shot a glance at me, inexpressibly peculiar, and quite incomprehensible: a glance that seemed to take and make note of every point in my shape, face, and dress; for it traversed all, quick, keen as lightning.
While Mary drew, Diana pursued a course of encyclopædic reading she had (to my awe and amazement) undertaken, and I fagged away at German, he pondered a mystic lore of his own: that of some Eastern tongue, the acquisition of which he thought necessary to his plans.
I could not hinder myself from pondering on the question—“Had he had fair play?” Whatever I did, that idea would bother me: it was so tiresomely pertinacious that I resolved on requesting leave to go to Wuthering Heights, and assist in the last duties to the dead.
I’m going with it to the library; and we’ll see what your father says to such loving.”

She sprang at her precious epistles, but I held them above my head; and then she poured out further frantic entreaties that I would burn them—do anything rather than show them.
Ahab did not like Micaiah, because he never prophesied good concerning him, but evil; probably he liked the sycophant son of Chenaanah better; yet might Ahab have escaped a bloody death, had he but stopped his ears to flattery, and opened them to faithful counsel.
Not a hint, however, did she drop about sending me to school: still I felt an instinctive certainty that she would not long endure me under the same roof with her; for her glance, now more than ever, when turned on me, expressed an insuperable and rooted aversion.
Presently he addressed me—“Your name, little girl?”

“Jane Eyre, sir.”

In uttering these words I looked up: he seemed to me a tall gentleman; but then I was very little; his features were large, and they and all the lines of his frame were equally harsh and prim.
From school duties she was exonerated: Mrs. Fairfax had pressed me into her service, and I was all day in the storeroom, helping (or hindering) her and the cook; learning to make custards and cheese-cakes and French pastry, to truss game and garnish desert-dishes.
He smiled; and I thought his smile was such as a sultan might, in a blissful and fond moment, bestow on a slave his gold and gems had enriched: I crushed his hand, which was ever hunting mine, vigorously, and thrust it back to him red with the passionate pressure.
I care not in this moment sweet,
Though all I have rushed o’er
Should come on pinion, strong and fleet,
Proclaiming vengeance sore:

Though haughty Hate should strike me down,
Right, bar approach to me,
And grinding Might, with furious frown,
Swear endless enmity.
If the man who had but one little ewe lamb that was dear to him as a daughter, that ate of his bread and drank of his cup, and lay in his bosom, had by some mistake slaughtered it at the shambles, he would not have rued his bloody blunder more than I now rue mine.
St. John is a strange being—”

She paused—I did not speak: soon she resumed—

“That brother of mine cherishes peculiar views of some sort respecting you, I am sure: he has long distinguished you by a notice and interest he never showed to any one else—to what end?
He little imagined how my heart warmed towards him when I beheld his black eyes withdraw so suspiciously under their brows, as I rode up, and when his fingers sheltered themselves, with a jealous resolution, still further in his waistcoat, as I announced my name.
“And because he is young and cheerful.”

“Bad, still.”

“And because he loves me.”

“Indifferent, coming there.”

“And he will be rich, and I shall like to be the greatest woman of the neighbourhood, and I shall be proud of having such a husband.”

“Worst of all.
But the uproar passed away in twenty minutes, leaving us all unharmed; excepting Cathy, who got thoroughly drenched for her obstinacy in refusing to take shelter, and standing bonnetless and shawlless to catch as much water as she could with her hair and clothes.
I did not close my eyes that night, nor did Mr. Linton: indeed, we never went to bed; and the servants were all up long before the usual hour, moving through the house with stealthy tread, and exchanging whispers as they encountered each other in their vocations.
“I didn’t bid you good-night that evening, and I didn’t go to Wuthering Heights the next: I wished to go exceedingly; but I was strangely excited, and dreaded to hear that Linton was dead, sometimes; and sometimes shuddered at the thought of encountering Hareton.
This done, I lingered yet a little longer: the flowers smelt so sweet as the dew fell; it was such a pleasant evening, so serene, so warm; the still glowing west promised so fairly another fine day on the morrow; the moon rose with such majesty in the grave east.
This circumstance was satisfactory: a private fear had haunted me, that in thus acting for myself, and by my own guidance, I ran the risk of getting into some scrape; and, above all things, I wished the result of my endeavours to be respectable, proper, en règle.
“Come to the fire,” said the master, when the tray was taken away, and Mrs. Fairfax had settled into a corner with her knitting; while Adèle was leading me by the hand round the room, showing me the beautiful books and ornaments on the consoles and chiffonnières.
By what instinct do you pretend to distinguish between a fallen seraph of the abyss and a messenger from the eternal throne—between a guide and a seducer?”

“I judged by your countenance, sir, which was troubled when you said the suggestion had returned upon you.
I was surprised at this circumstance: but still more was I amazed to perceive the air quite dim, as if filled with smoke; and, while looking to the right hand and left, to find whence these blue wreaths issued, I became further aware of a strong smell of burning.
After a silence of some minutes she observed—

“With her constitution she should have lived to a good old age: her life was shortened by trouble.” And then a spasm constricted her mouth for an instant: as it passed away she turned and left the room, and so did I.
Long after the little birds had left their nests; long after bees had come in the sweet prime of day to gather the heath honey before the dew was dried—when the long morning shadows were curtailed, and the sun filled earth and sky—I got up, and I looked round me.
I saw he was of the material from which nature hews her heroes—Christian and Pagan—her lawgivers, her statesmen, her conquerors: a steadfast bulwark for great interests to rest upon; but, at the fireside, too often a cold cumbrous column, gloomy and out of place.
I repeat it: there is no other way; and undoubtedly enough of love would follow upon marriage to render the union right even in your eyes.”

“I scorn your idea of love,” I could not help saying, as I rose up and stood before him, leaning my back against the rock.
You, perhaps, could make up your mind to be about my hand and chair—to wait on me as a kind little nurse (for you have an affectionate heart and a generous spirit, which prompt you to make sacrifices for those you pity), and that ought to suffice for me no doubt.
Do point out some landmarks by which I may know my way home: I have no more idea how to get there than you would have how to get to London!”

“Take the road you came,” she answered, ensconcing herself in a chair, with a candle, and the long book open before her.
Mr. Kenneth says he would wager his mare that he’ll outlive any man on this side Gimmerton, and go to the grave a hoary sinner; unless some happy chance out of the common course befall him.”

I went into the kitchen, and sat down to lull my little lamb to sleep.
I came to a stone where the highway branches off on to the moor at your left hand; a rough sand-pillar, with the letters W. H. cut on its north side, on the east, G., and on the south-west, T. G. It serves as a guide-post to the Grange, the Heights, and village.
I fancy it knew me: it pushed its nose against mine by way of salute, and then hastened to devour the porridge; while I groped from step to step, collecting the shattered earthenware, and drying the spatters of milk from the banister with my pocket-handkerchief.
Mr. Heathcliff, I believe, had not treated him physically ill; thanks to his fearless nature, which offered no temptation to that course of oppression: he had none of the timid susceptibility that would have given zest to ill-treatment, in Heathcliff’s judgment.
“Climb to that hillock, pass that bank, and by the time you reach the other side I shall have raised the birds.”

But there were so many hillocks and banks to climb and pass, that, at length, I began to be weary, and told her we must halt, and retrace our steps.
Never did any bird flying back to a plundered nest, which it had left brimful of chirping young ones, express more complete despair, in its anguished cries and flutterings, than she by her single “Oh!” and the change that transfigured her late happy countenance.
He took the one I had away, and ordered her to resign hers to me; she refused, and he—he struck her down, and wrenched it off the chain, and crushed it with his foot.”

“And were you pleased to see her struck?” I asked: having my designs in encouraging his talk.
Besides, of all, he has selected my favourite pieces that I love the most to repeat, as if out of deliberate malice.”

Hareton’s chest heaved in silence a minute: he laboured under a severe sense of mortification and wrath, which it was no easy task to suppress.
“I’ve neither cold nor fever, Nelly,” he remarked, in allusion to my morning’s speech; “and I’m ready to do justice to the food you give me.”

He took his knife and fork, and was going to commence eating, when the inclination appeared to become suddenly extinct.
“You have no business to take our books; you are a dependent, mama says; you have no money; your father left you none; you ought to beg, and not to live here with gentlemen’s children like us, and eat the same meals we do, and wear clothes at our mama’s expense.
This state of things should have been to me a paradise of peace, accustomed as I was to a life of ceaseless reprimand and thankless fagging; but, in fact, my racked nerves were now in such a state that no calm could soothe, and no pleasure excite them agreeably.
Why, then, should we ever sink overwhelmed with distress, when life is so soon over, and death is so certain an entrance to happiness—to glory?”

I was silent; Helen had calmed me; but in the tranquillity she imparted there was an alloy of inexpressible sadness.
Gathering my mantle about me, and sheltering my hands in my muff, I did not feel the cold, though it froze keenly; as was attested by a sheet of ice covering the causeway, where a little brooklet, now congealed, had overflowed after a rapid thaw some days since.
He is a harsh man; at once pompous and meddling; he cut off our hair; and for economy’s sake bought us bad needles and thread, with which we could hardly sew.”

“That was very false economy,” remarked Mrs. Fairfax, who now again caught the drift of the dialogue.
“Yes, there is your ‘boite’ at last: take it into a corner, you genuine daughter of Paris, and amuse yourself with disembowelling it,” said the deep and rather sarcastic voice of Mr. Rochester, proceeding from the depths of an immense easy-chair at the fireside.
I knew Mr. Rochester; though the begrimed face, the disordered dress (his coat hanging loose from one arm, as if it had been almost torn from his back in a scuffle), the desperate and scowling countenance, the rough, bristling hair might well have disguised him.
I looked at my love: that feeling which was my master’s—which he had created; it shivered in my heart, like a suffering child in a cold cradle; sickness and anguish had seized it; it could not seek Mr. Rochester’s arms—it could not derive warmth from his breast.
I should have longed rather to deviate to a wood I saw not far off, which appeared in its thick shade to offer inviting shelter; but I was so sick, so weak, so gnawed with nature’s cravings, instinct kept me roaming round abodes where there was a chance of food.
Diana said they would both consider themselves rich with a thousand pounds, so with five thousand they will do very well.”

“Tell me where I can get you a glass of water,” said St. John; “you must really make an effort to tranquillise your feelings.”

“Nonsense!
Your health, sir?”

I bowed and returned the pledge; beginning to perceive that it would be foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of a pack of curs; besides, I felt loth to yield the fellow further amusement at my expense; since his humour took that turn.
I never say to him, ‘Let this or that enemy alone, because it would be ungenerous or cruel to harm them;’ I say, ‘Let them alone, because I should hate them to be wronged:’ and he’d crush you like a sparrow’s egg, Isabella, if he found you a troublesome charge.
Will you” (looking at me) “step into the kitchen and see?”

I had received no thanks for my other service; and being unwilling to run to and fro at his behest, I replied—“Nobody is out there but Joseph.”

“I want to drink,” he exclaimed fretfully, turning away.
I heard him draw a pleasant picture to Zillah of what he would do if he were as strong as I: the inclination is there, and his very weakness will sharpen his wits to find a substitute for strength.”

“I know he has a bad nature,” said Catherine: “he’s your son.
Miss Miller approaching, seemed to ask her a question, and having received her answer, went back to her place, and said aloud—

“Monitor of the first class, fetch the globes!”

While the direction was being executed, the lady consulted moved slowly up the room.
“Well,” I asked impatiently, “is not Mrs. Reed a hard-hearted, bad woman?”

“She has been unkind to you, no doubt; because you see, she dislikes your cast of character, as Miss Scatcherd does mine; but how minutely you remember all she has done and said to you!
During January, February, and part of March, the deep snows, and, after their melting, the almost impassable roads, prevented our stirring beyond the garden walls, except to go to church; but within these limits we had to pass an hour every day in the open air.
In those days I was young, and all sorts of fancies bright and dark tenanted my mind: the memories of nursery stories were there amongst other rubbish; and when they recurred, maturing youth added to them a vigour and vividness beyond what childhood could give.
To you I can talk of my lovely one: for now you have seen her and know her.”

“Yes, sir.”

“She’s a rare one, is she not, Jane?”

“Yes, sir.”

“A strapper—a real strapper, Jane: big, brown, and buxom; with hair just such as the ladies of Carthage must have had.
I wished to leave immediately after the funeral, but Georgiana entreated me to stay till she could get off to London, whither she was now at last invited by her uncle, Mr. Gibson, who had come down to direct his sister’s interment and settle the family affairs.
I wonder how you will answer me a year hence, should I ask a favour it does not suit your convenience or pleasure to grant.”

“Ask me something now, Janet,—the least thing: I desire to be entreated—”

“Indeed I will, sir; I have my petition all ready.”

“Speak!
The shape standing before me had never crossed my eyes within the precincts of Thornfield Hall before; the height, the contour were new to me.”

“Describe it, Jane.”

“It seemed, sir, a woman, tall and large, with thick and dark hair hanging long down her back.
CHAPTER XXXI
My home, then, when I at last find a home,—is a cottage; a little room with whitewashed walls and a sanded floor, containing four painted chairs and a table, a clock, a cupboard, with two or three plates and dishes, and a set of tea-things in delf.
I was not going there: we were journeying to hear the famous Jabez Branderham preach, from the text—“Seventy Times Seven;” and either Joseph, the preacher, or I had committed the “First of the Seventy-First,” and were to be publicly exposed and excommunicated.
And we’ll soon persuade her to keep the visit secret: where is the harm of it?”

“The harm of it is, that her father would hate me if he found I suffered her to enter your house; and I am convinced you have a bad design in encouraging her to do so,” I replied.
Have you coughed much to-day?”

“Not quite so much, I think, ma’am.”

“And the pain in your chest?”

“It is a little better.”

Miss Temple got up, took her hand and examined her pulse; then she returned to her own seat: as she resumed it, I heard her sigh low.
I abandoned it and framed a humbler supplication; for change, stimulus: that petition, too, seemed swept off into vague space: “Then,” I cried, half desperate, “grant me at least a new servitude!”

Here a bell, ringing the hour of supper, called me downstairs.
Reply clearly.”

“I don’t think, sir, you have a right to command me, merely because you are older than I, or because you have seen more of the world than I have; your claim to superiority depends on the use you have made of your time and experience.”

“Humph!
I believe he is of mine;—I am sure he is—I feel akin to him—I understand the language of his countenance and movements: though rank and wealth sever us widely, I have something in my brain and heart, in my blood and nerves, that assimilates me mentally to him.
I do not think she will manage it; and yet it might be managed; and his wife might, I verily believe, be the very happiest woman the sun shines on.”

I have not yet said anything condemnatory of Mr. Rochester’s project of marrying for interest and connections.
As I sat in my usual nook, and looked at him with the light of the girandoles on the mantelpiece beaming full over him—for he occupied an arm-chair drawn close to the fire, and kept shrinking still nearer, as if he were cold, I compared him with Mr. Rochester.
“Sir?”

“I shall have to leave you in this room with this gentleman, for an hour, or perhaps two hours: you will sponge the blood as I do when it returns: if he feels faint, you will put the glass of water on that stand to his lips, and your salts to his nose.
I had known what it was to come back to Gateshead when a child after a long walk, to be scolded for looking cold or gloomy; and later, what it was to come back from church to Lowood, to long for a plenteous meal and a good fire, and to be unable to get either.
But joy soon effaced every other feeling; and loud as the wind blew, near and deep as the thunder crashed, fierce and frequent as the lightning gleamed, cataract-like as the rain fell during a storm of two hours’ duration, I experienced no fear and little awe.
“I can keep you in reasonable check now,” I reflected; “and I don’t doubt to be able to do it hereafter: if one expedient loses its virtue, another must be devised.”

Yet after all my task was not an easy one; often I would rather have pleased than teased him.
As you hope ever to be forgiven, Mr. Rivers, the high crime and misdemeanour of spoiling a sanded kitchen, tell me what I wish to know.”

“Well, then,” he said, “I yield; if not to your earnestness, to your perseverance: as stone is worn by continual dropping.
To his sisters, meantime, he was somewhat kinder than usual: as if afraid that mere coldness would not sufficiently convince me how completely I was banished and banned, he added the force of contrast; and this I am sure he did not by malice, but on principle.
Winter snows, I thought, had drifted through that void arch, winter rains beaten in at those hollow casements; for, amidst the drenched piles of rubbish, spring had cherished vegetation: grass and weed grew here and there between the stones and fallen rafters.
He is a dark-skinned gipsy in aspect, in dress and manners a gentleman: that is, as much a gentleman as many a country squire: rather slovenly, perhaps, yet not looking amiss with his negligence, because he has an erect and handsome figure; and rather morose.
I confess it with shame—shrunk icily into myself, like a snail; at every glance retired colder and farther; till finally the poor innocent was led to doubt her own senses, and, overwhelmed with confusion at her supposed mistake, persuaded her mamma to decamp.
Yes, yes, he’s rich enough to live in a finer house than this: but he’s very near—close-handed; and, if he had meant to flit to Thrushcross Grange, as soon as he heard of a good tenant he could not have borne to miss the chance of getting a few hundreds more.
Do you mark those two lines between your eyes; and those thick brows, that, instead of rising arched, sink in the middle; and that couple of black fiends, so deeply buried, who never open their windows boldly, but lurk glinting under them, like devil’s spies?
He had a terror of Earnshaw’s reputation, and shrunk from encountering him; and yet he was always received with our best attempts at civility: the master himself avoided offending him, knowing why he came; and if he could not be gracious, kept out of the way.
I thought as I lay there, with my head against that table leg, and my eyes dimly discerning the grey square of the window, that I was enclosed in the oak-panelled bed at home; and my heart ached with some great grief which, just waking, I could not recollect.
“However, I’m not helpless yet; I’ll open it myself.”

And sliding from the bed before I could hinder her, she crossed the room, walking very uncertainly, threw it back, and bent out, careless of the frosty air that cut about her shoulders as keen as a knife.
There was a great fire, and that was all the light in the huge apartment, whose floor had grown a uniform grey; and the once brilliant pewter-dishes, which used to attract my gaze when I was a girl, partook of a similar obscurity, created by tarnish and dust.
It is out of the question my going to see her, however: we are eternally divided; and should she really wish to oblige me, let her persuade the villain she has married to leave the country.”

“And you won’t write her a little note, sir?” I asked, imploringly.
Whether still on earth or now in heaven, her spirit is at home with God!”

I don’t know if it be a peculiarity in me, but I am seldom otherwise than happy while watching in the chamber of death, should no frenzied or despairing mourner share the duty with me.
Where is my share in thee, puling chicken?”

He took off the boy’s cap and pushed back his thick flaxen curls, felt his slender arms and his small fingers; during which examination Linton ceased crying, and lifted his great blue eyes to inspect the inspector.
Following her habit, my young lady descended early, and visited the kitchen: I watched her go to the door, on the arrival of a certain little boy; and, while the dairymaid filled his can, she tucked something into his jacket pocket, and plucked something out.
He said Mr. Green, the lawyer, was out when he arrived at his house, and he had to wait two hours for his re-entrance; and then Mr. Green told him he had a little business in the village that must be done; but he would be at Thrushcross Grange before morning.
I thought, once, I would have stayed there: when I saw her face again—it is hers yet!—he had hard work to stir me; but he said it would change if the air blew on it, and so I struck one side of the coffin loose, and covered it up: not Linton’s side, damn him!
But I’ve most of them written on my brain and printed in my heart, and you cannot deprive me of those!”

Earnshaw blushed crimson when his cousin made this revelation of his private literary accumulations, and stammered an indignant denial of her accusations.
He’s forgotten all I’ve done for him, and made on him, and goan and riven up a whole row o’ t’ grandest currant-trees i’ t’ garden!” and here he lamented outright; unmanned by a sense of his bitter injuries, and Earnshaw’s ingratitude and dangerous condition.
I lingered round them, under that benign sky: watched the moths fluttering among the heath and harebells, listened to the soft wind breathing through the grass, and wondered how any one could ever imagine unquiet slumbers for the sleepers in that quiet earth.
Then she is not your daughter?”

“No,—I have no family.”

I should have followed up my first inquiry, by asking in what way Miss Varens was connected with her; but I recollected it was not polite to ask too many questions: besides, I was sure to hear in time.
I wish to be a better man than I have been, than I am; as Job’s leviathan broke the spear, the dart, and the habergeon, hindrances which others count as iron and brass, I will esteem but straw and rotten wood.”

Adèle here ran before him with her shuttlecock.
“Where did you pick her up?”

“I did not pick her up; she was left on my hands.”

“You should have sent her to school.”

“I could not afford it: schools are so dear.”

“Why, I suppose you have a governess for her: I saw a person with her just now—is she gone?
“Pardon me, madam: no need of explanation; your own fine sense must inform you that one of your frowns would be a sufficient substitute for capital punishment.”

“Sing!” said she, and again touching the piano, she commenced an accompaniment in spirited style.
And while I sat there and looked out on the still trees and dim lawn, to a sweet air was sung in mellow tones the following strain:—

“The truest love that ever heart
Felt at its kindled core,
Did through each vein, in quickened start,
The tide of being pour.
“All day yesterday I was very busy, and very happy in my ceaseless bustle; for I am not, as you seem to think, troubled by any haunting fears about the new sphere, et cetera: I think it a glorious thing to have the hope of living with you, because I love you.
You could not open a book in this library that I have not looked into, and got something out of also: unless it be that range of Greek and Latin, and that of French; and those I know one from another: it is as much as you can expect of a poor man’s daughter.
What should hinder you from loving them?”

“If there be any, they are out of my way: I’ve seen none like Edgar.”

“You may see some; and he won’t always be handsome, and young, and may not always be rich.”

“He is now; and I have only to do with the present.
He was as quick and as intelligent a child as ever you were; and I’m hurt that he should be despised now, because that base Heathcliff has treated him so unjustly.”

“Well, Ellen, you won’t cry about it, will you?” she exclaimed, surprised at my earnestness.
If you be, I’m certain one thing is not stronger—your regard for me: speak,—are you?”

The tears gushed from Linton’s eyes as he answered, “Yes, yes, I am!” And, still under the spell of the imaginary voice, his gaze wandered up and down to detect its owner.
I bestowed little attention on her proceedings, but, presently, I heard her begin—“I’ve found out, Hareton, that I want—that I’m glad—that I should like you to be my cousin now, if you had not grown so cross to me, and so rough.”

Hareton returned no answer.
When beneath its walls, I perceived decay had made progress, even in seven months: many a window showed black gaps deprived of glass; and slates jutted off here and there, beyond the right line of the roof, to be gradually worked off in coming autumn storms.
I suppose you are an orphan: are not either your father or your mother dead?”

“Both died before I can remember.”

“Well, all the girls here have lost either one or both parents, and this is called an institution for educating orphans.”

“Do we pay no money?
His efforts were so vigorous, I thought he could not be much hurt; but I asked him the question—

“Are you injured, sir?”

I think he was swearing, but am not certain; however, he was pronouncing some formula which prevented him from replying to me directly.
This ruddy shine issued from the great dining-room, whose two-leaved door stood open, and showed a genial fire in the grate, glancing on marble hearth and brass fire-irons, and revealing purple draperies and polished furniture, in the most pleasant radiance.
Criticise me: does my forehead not please you?”

He lifted up the sable waves of hair which lay horizontally over his brow, and showed a solid enough mass of intellectual organs, but an abrupt deficiency where the suave sign of benevolence should have risen.
Here and there I strayed through the orchard, gathered up the apples with which the grass round the tree roots was thickly strewn; then I employed myself in dividing the ripe from the unripe; I carried them into the house and put them away in the store-room.
I observed but two points in planning my departure—speed, secrecy: to secure these, I had to leave behind me everything I possessed except a small parcel; which, in my hurry and trouble of mind, I forgot to take out of the coach that brought me to Whitcross.
“I am ready to go to India, if I may go free.”

“Your answer requires a commentary,” he said; “it is not clear.”

“You have hitherto been my adopted brother—I, your adopted sister: let us continue as such: you and I had better not marry.”

He shook his head.
I’d not exchange, for a thousand lives, my condition here, for Edgar Linton’s at Thrushcross Grange—not if I might have the privilege of flinging Joseph off the highest gable, and painting the house-front with Hindley’s blood!”

“Hush, hush!” I interrupted.
“I’ll repeat our conversation, word for word, Isabella; and you point out any charm it could have had for you.”

“I don’t mind the conversation,” she answered: “I wanted to be with—”

“Well?” said Catherine, perceiving her hesitate to complete the sentence.
I dread sleeping: my dreams appal me.”

“A sound sleep would do you good, ma’am,” I answered: “and I hope this suffering will prevent your trying starving again.”

“Oh, if I were but in my own bed in the old house!” she went on bitterly, wringing her hands.
I was cogitating what the mystery might be, and determined Catherine should never suffer to benefit him or any one else, by my good will; when, hearing a rustle among the ling, I looked up and saw Mr. Heathcliff almost close upon us, descending the Heights.
There is a thought that for strength should avail me,
    Though both of shelter and kindred despoiled;
Heaven is a home, and a rest will not fail me;
    God is a friend to the poor orphan child.”

“Come, Miss Jane, don’t cry,” said Bessie as she finished.
I say alone—Leah is a nice girl to be sure, and John and his wife are very decent people; but then you see they are only servants, and one can’t converse with them on terms of equality: one must keep them at due distance, for fear of losing one’s authority.
Kindly, as usual—and, as usual, rather trite—she condoled with him on the pressure of business he had had all day; on the annoyance it must have been to him with that painful sprain: then she commended his patience and perseverance in going through with it.
A dress of rose-coloured satin, very short, and as full in the skirt as it could be gathered, replaced the brown frock she had previously worn; a wreath of rosebuds circled her forehead; her feet were dressed in silk stockings and small white satin sandals.
Some of them threw themselves in half-reclining positions on the sofas and ottomans: some bent over the tables and examined the flowers and books: the rest gathered in a group round the fire: all talked in a low but clear tone which seemed habitual to them.
Au reste, we all know them: danger of bad example to innocence of childhood; distractions and consequent neglect of duty on the part of the attached—mutual alliance and reliance; confidence thence resulting—insolence accompanying—mutiny and general blow-up.
It was no more the withered limb of eld than my own; it was a rounded supple member, with smooth fingers, symmetrically turned; a broad ring flashed on the little finger, and stooping forward, I looked at it, and saw a gem I had seen a hundred times before.
There was something ascetic in her look, which was augmented by the extreme plainness of a straight-skirted, black, stuff dress, a starched linen collar, hair combed away from the temples, and the nun-like ornament of a string of ebony beads and a crucifix.
I have a place to repair to, which will be a secure sanctuary from hateful reminiscences, from unwelcome intrusion—even from falsehood and slander.”

“And take Adèle with you, sir,” I interrupted; “she will be a companion for you.”

“What do you mean, Jane?
At a later day, I knew the language and the book; therefore, I will here quote the line: though, when I first heard it, it was only like a stroke on sounding brass to me—conveying no meaning:—

“‘Da trat hervor Einer, anzusehen wie die Sternen Nacht.’ Good!
My purpose, in short, is to have all things in an absolutely perfect state of readiness for Diana and Mary before next Thursday; and my ambition is to give them a beau-ideal of a welcome when they come.”

St. John smiled slightly: still he was dissatisfied.
He said he called to gather information concerning me from you, supposing you resided there still; and Joseph told Hindley, who came out and fell to questioning him of what he had been doing, and how he had been living; and finally, desired him to walk in.
Miss Catherine is a good girl: I don’t fear that she will go wilfully wrong; and people who do their duty are always finally rewarded.”

Spring advanced; yet my master gathered no real strength, though he resumed his walks in the grounds with his daughter.
Cathy was a powerful ally at home; and between them they at length persuaded my master to acquiesce in their having a ride or a walk together about once a week, under my guardianship, and on the moors nearest the Grange: for June found him still declining.
The anguish he had exhibited on the moor subsided as soon as ever he entered Wuthering Heights; so I guessed he had been menaced with an awful visitation of wrath if he failed in decoying us there; and, that accomplished, he had no further immediate fears.
He stood at Miss Temple’s side; he was speaking low in her ear: I did not doubt he was making disclosures of my villainy; and I watched her eye with painful anxiety, expecting every moment to see its dark orb turn on me a glance of repugnance and contempt.
“You examine me, Miss Eyre,” said he: “do you think me handsome?”

I should, if I had deliberated, have replied to this question by something conventionally vague and polite; but the answer somehow slipped from my tongue before I was aware—“No, sir.”

“Ah!
Really your organs of wonder and credulity are easily excited: you seem, by the importance of you all—my good mama included—ascribe to this matter, absolutely to believe we have a genuine witch in the house, who is in close alliance with the old gentleman.
She told me one evening, when more disposed to be communicative than usual, that John’s conduct, and the threatened ruin of the family, had been a source of profound affliction to her: but she had now, she said, settled her mind, and formed her resolution.
“Because you are sorry to leave it?”

The vehemence of emotion, stirred by grief and love within me, was claiming mastery, and struggling for full sway, and asserting a right to predominate, to overcome, to live, rise, and reign at last: yes,—and to speak.
do you think you can live with me, and see me daily, and yet, if you still love me, be always cold and distant?”

“No, sir; that I am certain I could not; and therefore I see there is but one way: but you will be furious if I mention it.”

“Oh, mention it!
A stand between them supported a second candle and two great volumes, to which they frequently referred, comparing them, seemingly, with the smaller books they held in their hands, like people consulting a dictionary to aid them in the task of translation.
Rivers,” I said, turning to him, and looking at him, as he looked at me, openly and without diffidence, “you and your sisters have done me a great service—the greatest man can do his fellow-being; you have rescued me, by your noble hospitality, from death.
Having once explained to them that I could not now be explicit about my plans, they kindly and wisely acquiesced in the silence with which I pursued them, according to me the privilege of free action I should under similar circumstances have accorded them.
I’ll come in two minutes!”

I obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber; when, ignorant where the narrow lobbies led, I stood still, and was witness, involuntarily, to a piece of superstition on the part of my landlord which belied, oddly, his apparent sense.
I was surprised to witness how coolly the child gathered himself up, and went on with his intention; exchanging saddles and all, and then sitting down on a bundle of hay to overcome the qualm which the violent blow occasioned, before he entered the house.
I perceive that people in these regions acquire over people in towns the value that a spider in a dungeon does over a spider in a cottage, to their various occupants; and yet the deepened attraction is not entirely owing to the situation of the looker-on.
It is childish and, instead of melting into tears because I said that Heathcliff was now worthy of anyone’s regard, and it would honour the first gentleman in the country to be his friend, he ought to have said it for me, and been delighted from sympathy.
“I’ve been so far forbearing with you, sir,” he said quietly; “not that I was ignorant of your miserable, degraded character, but I felt you were only partly responsible for that; and Catherine wishing to keep up your acquaintance, I acquiesced—foolishly.
In his case, I was gratified; and, ignoble as it seems to insult a fallen enemy, I couldn’t miss this chance of sticking in a dart: his weakness was the only time when I could taste the delight of paying wrong for wrong.”

“Fie, fie, Miss!” I interrupted.
I’ve a very good mind to shake you severely, for your contemptible treachery, and your imbecile conceit.”

I did give him a slight shaking; but it brought on the cough, and he took to his ordinary resource of moaning and weeping, and Catherine rebuked me.
She dared not try the doors lest the dogs should raise an alarm; she visited the empty chambers and examined their windows; and, luckily, lighting on her mother’s, she got easily out of its lattice, and on to the ground, by means of the fir-tree close by.
Missis intends you to leave Gateshead in a day or two, and you shall choose what toys you like to take with you.”

“Bessie, you must promise not to scold me any more till I go.”

“Well, I will; but mind you are a very good girl, and don’t be afraid of me.
I was one of the last to go out, and in passing the tables, I saw one teacher take a basin of the porridge and taste it; she looked at the others; all their countenances expressed displeasure, and one of them, the stout one, whispered—

“Abominable stuff!
If she struck me with that rod, I should get it from her hand; I should break it under her nose.”

“Probably you would do nothing of the sort: but if you did, Mr. Brocklehurst would expel you from the school; that would be a great grief to your relations.
She had obviously not heard anything to her advantage: and it seemed to me, from her prolonged fit of gloom and taciturnity, that she herself, notwithstanding her professed indifference, attached undue importance to whatever revelations had been made her.
I had, again and again, held the water to Mason’s white lips; again and again offered him the stimulating salts: my efforts seemed ineffectual: either bodily or mental suffering, or loss of blood, or all three combined, were fast prostrating his strength.
After a season of darkness and struggling, light broke and relief fell: my cramped existence all at once spread out to a plain without bounds—my powers heard a call from heaven to rise, gather their full strength, spread their wings, and mount beyond ken.
He said it was a very old name in that neighbourhood; that the ancestors of the house were wealthy; that all Morton had once belonged to them; that even now he considered the representative of that house might, if he liked, make an alliance with the best.
“You have lived here a considerable time,” I commenced; “did you not say sixteen years?”

“Eighteen, sir: I came when the mistress was married, to wait on her; after she died, the master retained me for his housekeeper.”

“Indeed.”

There ensued a pause.
He would have recoiled still more had he been aware that her attachment rose unsolicited, and was bestowed where it awakened no reciprocation of sentiment; for the minute he discovered its existence he laid the blame on Heathcliff’s deliberate designing.
“Joseph will show you Heathcliff’s chamber,” said he; “open that door—he’s in there.”

I was going to obey, but he suddenly arrested me, and added in the strangest tone—“Be so good as to turn your lock, and draw your bolt—don’t omit it!”

“Well!” I said.
come, run.”

She ran, and returned and ran again, many times before my sober footsteps reached the gate, and then she seated herself on the grassy bank beside the path, and tried to wait patiently; but that was impossible: she couldn’t be still a minute.
I knew that you could not keep up an acquaintance with your cousin without being brought into contact with him; and I knew he would detest you on my account; so for your own good, and nothing else, I took precautions that you should not see Linton again.
Are you willing to return, escorted by me?”

He approached once more, and made as if he would seize the fragile being; but, shrinking back, Linton clung to his cousin, and implored her to accompany him, with a frantic importunity that admitted no denial.
My reflections were too undefined and fragmentary to merit record: I hardly yet knew where I was; Gateshead and my past life seemed floated away to an immeasurable distance; the present was vague and strange, and of the future I could form no conjecture.
They now proceeded to address divers remarks and reproofs to Miss Smith, who was charged with the care of the linen and the inspection of the dormitories: but I had no time to listen to what they said; other matters called off and enchanted my attention.
I was passing the back-parlour or teachers’ sitting-room, the door of which was half open, to go to the kitchen, when some one ran out—

“It’s her, I am sure!—I could have told her anywhere!” cried the individual who stopped my progress and took my hand.
No need to warn her not to disarrange her attire: when she was dressed, she sat demurely down in her little chair, taking care previously to lift up the satin skirt for fear she should crease it, and assured me she would not stir thence till I was ready.
Fairfax will smile you a calm welcome, to be sure,” said I; “and little Adèle will clap her hands and jump to see you: but you know very well you are thinking of another than they, and that he is not thinking of you.”

But what is so headstrong as youth?
Mr. St. John, when he saw me, merely bowed and passed through; the two ladies stopped: Mary, in a few words, kindly and calmly expressed the pleasure she felt in seeing me well enough to be able to come down; Diana took my hand: she shook her head at me.
Throughout there was a strange bitterness; an absence of consolatory gentleness; stern allusions to Calvinistic doctrines—election, predestination, reprobation—were frequent; and each reference to these points sounded like a sentence pronounced for doom.
What you had left before I saw you, of course I do not know; but I counsel you to resist firmly every temptation which would incline you to look back: pursue your present career steadily, for some months at least.”

“It is what I mean to do,” I answered.
The head was finished already: there was but the background to tint and the drapery to shade off; a touch of carmine, too, to add to the ripe lips—a soft curl here and there to the tresses—a deeper tinge to the shadow of the lash under the azured eyelid.
“I don’t mean to be baffled by a little stiffness on your part; I’m prepared to go to considerable lengths.” I continued, “You observed it closely and distinctly; but I have no objection to your looking at it again,” and I rose and placed it in his hand.
Dark handsome new carpets and curtains, an arrangement of some carefully selected antique ornaments in porcelain and bronze, new coverings, and mirrors, and dressing-cases, for the toilet tables, answered the end: they looked fresh without being glaring.
You are younger, and yet, I’ll be bound, you are taller and twice as broad across the shoulders; you could knock him down in a twinkling; don’t you feel that you could?”

Heathcliff’s face brightened a moment; then it was overcast afresh, and he sighed.
Well, we must be for ourselves in the long run; the mild and generous are only more justly selfish than the domineering; and it ended when circumstances caused each to feel that the one’s interest was not the chief consideration in the other’s thoughts.
Try to be cheerful now; the travelling is at an end, and you have nothing to do but rest and amuse yourself as you please.”

“Let me go to bed, then,” answered the boy, shrinking from Catherine’s salute; and he put his fingers to remove incipient tears.
He stood a considerable period, viewing the carriage-road through the grounds; then started off at a brisk pace, as if he had detected something, and reappeared presently, leading Miss’s pony; and there she was, just dismounted, and walking by its side.
Her countenance grew wan with watching and sorrow, and my master gladly dismissed her to what he flattered himself would be a happy change of scene and society; drawing comfort from the hope that she would not now be left entirely alone after his death.
As he took the cup from my hand, Adèle, thinking the moment propitious for making a request in my favour, cried out—

“N’est-ce pas, monsieur, qu’il y a un cadeau pour Mademoiselle Eyre dans votre petit coffre?”

“Who talks of cadeaux?” said he gruffly.
I like Thornfield, its antiquity, its retirement, its old crow-trees and thorn-trees, its grey façade, and lines of dark windows reflecting that metal welkin: and yet how long have I abhorred the very thought of it, shunned it like a great plague-house?
Both ladies, as I advanced, rose to welcome me, and both addressed me by the name of “Miss Eyre.” Eliza’s greeting was delivered in a short, abrupt voice, without a smile; and then she sat down again, fixed her eyes on the fire, and seemed to forget me.
While arranging my hair, I looked at my face in the glass, and felt it was no longer plain: there was hope in its aspect and life in its colour; and my eyes seemed as if they had beheld the fount of fruition, and borrowed beams from the lustrous ripple.
She had a woman to take care of her called Mrs. Poole—an able woman in her line, and very trustworthy, but for one fault—a fault common to a deal of them nurses and matrons—she kept a private bottle of gin by her, and now and then took a drop over-much.
It glowed delightfully in the radiance of an immense fire, compounded of coal, peat, and wood; and near the table, laid for a plentiful evening meal, I was pleased to observe the “missis,” an individual whose existence I had never previously suspected.
He would not even have seen after their going to church on Sundays, only Joseph and the curate reprimanded his carelessness when they absented themselves; and that reminded him to order Heathcliff a flogging, and Catherine a fast from dinner or supper.
Joseph fell under a ban also: he would speak his mind, and lecture her all the same as if she were a little girl; and she esteemed herself a woman, and our mistress, and thought that her recent illness gave her a claim to be treated with consideration.
I getten summut else to do,” he answered, and continued his work; moving his lantern jaws meanwhile, and surveying my dress and countenance (the former a great deal too fine, but the latter, I’m sure, as sad as he could desire) with sovereign contempt.
It shall not exist!”

Mr. Edgar’s coldness depressed me exceedingly; and all the way from the Grange I puzzled my brains how to put more heart into what he said, when I repeated it; and how to soften his refusal of even a few lines to console Isabella.
I grew very uncomfortable, meanwhile; for the afternoon wore fast away, the man whom I had sent off returned from his errand, and I could distinguish, by the shine of the western sun up the valley, a concourse thickening outside Gimmerton chapel porch.
The earlier dated were embarrassed and short; gradually, however, they expanded into copious love-letters, foolish, as the age of the writer rendered natural, yet with touches here and there which I thought were borrowed from a more experienced source.
Just imagine your father in my place, and Linton in yours; then think how you would value your careless lover if he refused to stir a step to comfort you, when your father himself entreated him; and don’t, from pure stupidity, fall into the same error.
I did so; a brief examination convinced me that the contents were less taking than the title: “Rasselas” looked dull to my trifling taste; I saw nothing about fairies, nothing about genii; no bright variety seemed spread over the closely-printed pages.
This testimonial I accordingly received in about a month, forwarded a copy of it to Mrs. Fairfax, and got that lady’s reply, stating that she was satisfied, and fixing that day fortnight as the period for my assuming the post of governess in her house.
So happy, so gratified did I become with this new interest added to life, that I ceased to pine after kindred: my thin crescent-destiny seemed to enlarge; the blanks of existence were filled up; my bodily health improved; I gathered flesh and strength.
mama, you mean; she is extremely poorly: I doubt if you can see her to-night.”

“If,” said I, “you would just step upstairs and tell her I am come, I should be much obliged to you.”

Georgiana almost started, and she opened her blue eyes wild and wide.
In the course of the afternoon and evening these hints were enlarged on: various soft conversations were reported, and sentimental scenes represented; and, in short, a volume of a novel of fashionable life was that day improvised by her for my benefit.
There was no superfluous ornament in the room—not one modern piece of furniture, save a brace of workboxes and a lady’s desk in rosewood, which stood on a side-table: everything—including the carpet and curtains—looked at once well worn and well saved.
You may even think it degrading—for I see now your habits have been what the world calls refined: your tastes lean to the ideal, and your society has at least been amongst the educated; but I consider that no service degrades which can better our race.
“Twenty years ago, a poor curate—never mind his name at this moment—fell in love with a rich man’s daughter; she fell in love with him, and married him, against the advice of all her friends, who consequently disowned her immediately after the wedding.
Jane, will you marry me?”

“Yes, sir.”

“A poor blind man, whom you will have to lead about by the hand?”

“Yes, sir.”

“A crippled man, twenty years older than you, whom you will have to wait on?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Truly, Jane?”

“Most truly, sir.”

“Oh!
“I believe you think me a fiend,” he said, with his dismal laugh: “something too horrible to live under a decent roof.” Then turning to Catherine, who was there, and who drew behind me at his approach, he added, half sneeringly,—“Will you come, chuck?
I mean the timorous or carping few who doubt the tendency of such books as “Jane Eyre:” in whose eyes whatever is unusual is wrong; whose ears detect in each protest against bigotry—that parent of crime—an insult to piety, that regent of God on earth.
I cannot tell; but I think if some of those amongst whom he hurls the Greek fire of his sarcasm, and over whom he flashes the levin-brand of his denunciation, were to take his warnings in time—they or their seed might yet escape a fatal Rimoth-Gilead.
I had indeed levelled at that prominent feature as hard a blow as my knuckles could inflict; and when I saw that either that or my look daunted him, I had the greatest inclination to follow up my advantage to purpose; but he was already with his mama.
The chamber looked such a bright little place to me as the sun shone in between the gay blue chintz window curtains, showing papered walls and a carpeted floor, so unlike the bare planks and stained plaster of Lowood, that my spirits rose at the view.
When I saw my charmer thus come in accompanied by a cavalier, I seemed to hear a hiss, and the green snake of jealousy, rising on undulating coils from the moonlit balcony, glided within my waistcoat, and ate its way in two minutes to my heart’s core.
The kitchen, the butler’s pantry, the servants’ hall, the entrance hall, were equally alive; and the saloons were only left void and still when the blue sky and halcyon sunshine of the genial spring weather called their occupants out into the grounds.
“She says, sir, that she’ll have no gentlemen; they need not trouble themselves to come near her; nor,” he added, with difficulty suppressing a titter, “any ladies either, except the young, and single.”

“By Jove, she has taste!” exclaimed Henry Lynn.
Pressed for further explanation, they declared she had told them of things they had said and done when they were mere children; described books and ornaments they had in their boudoirs at home: keepsakes that different relations had presented to them.
At a late hour, after I had been in bed some time, I heard the visitors repair to their chambers: I distinguished Mr. Rochester’s voice, and heard him say, “This way, Mason; this is your room.”

He spoke cheerfully: the gay tones set my heart at ease.
“It is always the way of events in this life,” he continued presently: “no sooner have you got settled in a pleasant resting-place, than a voice calls out to you to rise and move on, for the hour of repose is expired.”

“Must I move on, sir?” I asked.
Yesterday I trusted well in Providence, and believed that events were working together for your good and mine: it was a fine day, if you recollect—the calmness of the air and sky forbade apprehensions respecting your safety or comfort on your journey.
I leant forward also, for the purpose of signing to Heathcliff, whose step I recognised, not to come further; and, at the instant when my eye quitted Hareton, he gave a sudden spring, delivered himself from the careless grasp that held him, and fell.
He was so obstinate in his resolution, that Heathcliff deemed it expedient to compel from my lips a recapitulation of what had taken place; standing over me, heaving with malevolence, as I reluctantly delivered the account in answer to his questions.
He appeared to have bent his malevolence on making him a brute: he was never taught to read or write; never rebuked for any bad habit which did not annoy his keeper; never led a single step towards virtue, or guarded by a single precept against vice.
“Why didn’t mamma and he live together, as other people do?”

“He had business to keep him in the north,” I answered, “and your mother’s health required her to reside in the south.”

“And why didn’t mamma speak to me about him?” persevered the child.
The poor thing was finally got off, with several delusive assurances that his absence should be short: that Mr. Edgar and Cathy would visit him, and other promises, equally ill-founded, which I invented and reiterated at intervals throughout the way.
There seldom passed much talk between them: Linton learnt his lessons and spent his evenings in a small apartment they called the parlour: or else lay in bed all day: for he was constantly getting coughs, and colds, and aches, and pains of some sort.
He sighed and moaned like one under great suffering, and kept it up for a quarter of an hour; on purpose to distress his cousin apparently, for whenever he caught a stifled sob from her he put renewed pain and pathos into the inflexions of his voice.
How ill you do look!”

Catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishment: she changed the ejaculation of joy on her lips to one of alarm; and the congratulation on their long-postponed meeting to an anxious inquiry, whether he were worse than usual?
Mrs. Reed probably considered she had kept this promise; and so she had, I dare say, as well as her nature would permit her; but how could she really like an interloper not of her race, and unconnected with her, after her husband’s death, by any tie?
I have not yet alluded to the visits of Mr. Brocklehurst; and indeed that gentleman was from home during the greater part of the first month after my arrival; perhaps prolonging his stay with his friend the archdeacon: his absence was a relief to me.
I had my own reasons for being dismayed at this apparition; too well I remembered the perfidious hints given by Mrs. Reed about my disposition, &c.; the promise pledged by Mr. Brocklehurst to apprise Miss Temple and the teachers of my vicious nature.
Exhausted by emotion, my language was more subdued than it generally was when it developed that sad theme; and mindful of Helen’s warnings against the indulgence of resentment, I infused into the narrative far less of gall and wormwood than ordinary.
Then the importance of the process quickly steadied her, and by the time she had her curls arranged in well-smoothed, drooping clusters, her pink satin frock put on, her long sash tied, and her lace mittens adjusted, she looked as grave as any judge.
When a lady, young and full of life and health, charming with beauty and endowed with the gifts of rank and fortune, sits and smiles in the eyes of a gentleman you—”

“I what?”

“You know—and perhaps think well of.”

“I don’t know the gentlemen here.
It turns from me; it will not suffer further scrutiny; it seems to deny, by a mocking glance, the truth of the discoveries I have already made,—to disown the charge both of sensibility and chagrin: its pride and reserve only confirm me in my opinion.
Sympathies, I believe, exist (for instance, between far-distant, long-absent, wholly estranged relatives asserting, notwithstanding their alienation, the unity of the source to which each traces his origin) whose workings baffle mortal comprehension.
The hay was all got in; the fields round Thornfield were green and shorn; the roads white and baked; the trees were in their dark prime; hedge and wood, full-leaved and deeply tinted, contrasted well with the sunny hue of the cleared meadows between.
Where the sun had gone down in simple state—pure of the pomp of clouds—spread a solemn purple, burning with the light of red jewel and furnace flame at one point, on one hill-peak, and extending high and wide, soft and still softer, over half heaven.
And if I had loved him less I should have thought his accent and look of exultation savage; but, sitting by him, roused from the nightmare of parting—called to the paradise of union—I thought only of the bliss given me to drink in so abundant a flow.
Do you accept my solution of the mystery?”

I reflected, and in truth it appeared to me the only possible one: satisfied I was not, but to please him I endeavoured to appear so—relieved, I certainly did feel; so I answered him with a contented smile.
The other articles I made up in a parcel; my purse, containing twenty shillings (it was all I had), I put in my pocket: I tied on my straw bonnet, pinned my shawl, took the parcel and my slippers, which I would not put on yet, and stole from my room.
What did most of the people do?”

“Some were farm labourers; a good deal worked at Mr. Oliver’s needle-factory, and at the foundry.”

“Did Mr. Oliver employ women?”

“Nay; it was men’s work.”

“And what do the women do?”

“I knawn’t,” was the answer.
Mrs. Reed kept the orphan ten years: whether it was happy or not with her, I cannot say, never having been told; but at the end of that time she transferred it to a place you know—being no other than Lowood School, where you so long resided yourself.
He encouraged him to regard Hindley as a reprobate; and, night after night, he regularly grumbled out a long string of tales against Heathcliff and Catherine: always minding to flatter Earnshaw’s weakness by heaping the heaviest blame on the latter.
At least, it was praiseworthy ambition for him to desire to be as accomplished as Linton; and probably he did not learn merely to show off: you had made him ashamed of his ignorance before, I have no doubt; and he wished to remedy it and please you.
I believe an interview would convince you that my father’s character is not mine: he affirms I am more your nephew than his son; and though I have faults which render me unworthy of Catherine, she has excused them, and for her sake, you should also.
“No—better—better!” he panted, trembling, and retaining her hand as if he needed its support, while his large blue eyes wandered timidly over her; the hollowness round them transforming to haggard wildness the languid expression they once possessed.
After a short period he resumed his meditation on the picture, took it down and leant it against the sofa to contemplate it at better advantage; and while so occupied Catherine entered, announcing that she was ready, when her pony should be saddled.
Heathcliff’s black eyes flashed; he seemed ready to tear Catherine in pieces, and I was just worked up to risk coming to the rescue, when of a sudden his fingers relaxed; he shifted his grasp from her head to her arm, and gazed intently in her face.
I was a mile from Thornfield, in a lane noted for wild roses in summer, for nuts and blackberries in autumn, and even now possessing a few coral treasures in hips and haws, but whose best winter delight lay in its utter solitude and leafless repose.
Two thin hands, joined under the forehead, and supporting it, drew up before the lower features a sable veil; a brow quite bloodless, white as bone, and an eye hollow and fixed, blank of meaning but for the glassiness of despair, alone were visible.
“Away!” he cried harshly; “keep at a distance, child; or go in to Sophie!” Continuing then to pursue his walk in silence, I ventured to recall him to the point whence he had abruptly diverged—

“Did you leave the balcony, sir,” I asked, “when Mdlle.
I am no judge of music, but Mr. Rochester is; and I heard him say her execution was remarkably good.”

“And this beautiful and accomplished lady, she is not yet married?”

“It appears not: I fancy neither she nor her sister have very large fortunes.
Mesdames” (to the dowagers), “you will take cold to a dead certainty, if you stay in this chill gallery any longer.”

And so, by dint of alternate coaxing and commanding, he contrived to get them all once more enclosed in their separate dormitories.
Then, too, existence for you must be a scene of continual change and excitement, or else the world is a dungeon: you must be admired, you must be courted, you must be flattered—you must have music, dancing, and society—or you languish, you die away.
As we re-entered the carriage, and I sat back feverish and fagged, I remembered what, in the hurry of events, dark and bright, I had wholly forgotten—the letter of my uncle, John Eyre, to Mrs. Reed: his intention to adopt me and make me his legatee.
I thought how I would carry down to you the square of unembroidered blond I had myself prepared as a covering for my low-born head, and ask if that was not good enough for a woman who could bring her husband neither fortune, beauty, nor connections.
Did you find poison, or a dagger, that you look so mournful now?”

“No, no, sir; besides the delicacy and richness of the fabric, I found nothing save Fairfax Rochester’s pride; and that did not scare me, because I am used to the sight of the demon.
Mr. Mason, have the goodness to step forward.”

Mr. Rochester, on hearing the name, set his teeth; he experienced, too, a sort of strong convulsive quiver; near to him as I was, I felt the spasmodic movement of fury or despair run through his frame.
I approached it; it was a road or a track: it led straight up to the light, which now beamed from a sort of knoll, amidst a clump of trees—firs, apparently, from what I could distinguish of the character of their forms and foliage through the gloom.
I could never rest in communication with strong, discreet, and refined minds, whether male or female, till I had passed the outworks of conventional reserve, and crossed the threshold of confidence, and won a place by their heart’s very hearthstone.
there’s good books eneugh if ye’ll read ’em: sit ye down, and think o’ yer sowls!’

“Saying this, he compelled us so to square our positions that we might receive from the far-off fire a dull ray to show us the text of the lumber he thrust upon us.
Now, Mr. Earnshaw did not understand jokes from his children: he had always been strict and grave with them; and Catherine, on her part, had no idea why her father should be crosser and less patient in his ailing condition than he was in his prime.
You may, however, fall out, at last, over something of equal consequence to both sides; and then those you term weak are very capable of being as obstinate as you.”

“And then we shall fight to the death, sha’n’t we, Nelly?” she returned, laughing.
She said Mr. Heathcliff seemed to dislike him ever longer and worse, though he took some trouble to conceal it: he had an antipathy to the sound of his voice, and could not do at all with his sitting in the same room with him many minutes together.
“Catherine is coming, dear master!” I whispered; “she is alive and well; and will be here, I hope, to-night.”

I trembled at the first effects of this intelligence: he half rose up, looked eagerly round the apartment, and then sank back in a swoon.
I couldn’t lie there; for the moment I closed my eyes, she was either outside the window, or sliding back the panels, or entering the room, or even resting her darling head on the same pillow as she did when a child; and I must open my lids to see.
But ere he had crossed the door-stones, Mr. Heathcliff, coming up the causeway, encountered him, and laying hold of his shoulder asked,—“What’s to do now, my lad?”

“Naught, naught,” he said, and broke away to enjoy his grief and anger in solitude.
He muttered detached words also; the only one I could catch was the name of Catherine, coupled with some wild term of endearment or suffering; and spoken as one would speak to a person present; low and earnest, and wrung from the depth of his soul.
She boasted of beautiful paintings of landscapes and flowers by them executed; of songs they could sing and pieces they could play, of purses they could net, of French books they could translate; till my spirit was moved to emulation as I listened.
Miss Miller was more ordinary; ruddy in complexion, though of a careworn countenance; hurried in gait and action, like one who had always a multiplicity of tasks on hand: she looked, indeed, what I afterwards found she really was, an under-teacher.
I leant against a pillar of the verandah, drew my grey mantle close about me, and, trying to forget the cold which nipped me without, and the unsatisfied hunger which gnawed me within, delivered myself up to the employment of watching and thinking.
A little solace came at tea-time, in the shape of a double ration of bread—a whole, instead of a half, slice—with the delicious addition of a thin scrape of butter: it was the hebdomadal treat to which we all looked forward from Sabbath to Sabbath.
A frequent interlude of these performances was the enactment of the part of Eutychus by some half-dozen of little girls, who, overpowered with sleep, would fall down, if not out of the third loft, yet off the fourth form, and be taken up half dead.
We feasted that evening as on nectar and ambrosia; and not the least delight of the entertainment was the smile of gratification with which our hostess regarded us, as we satisfied our famished appetites on the delicate fare she liberally supplied.
Lady Lynn was a large and stout personage of about forty, very erect, very haughty-looking, richly dressed in a satin robe of changeful sheen: her dark hair shone glossily under the shade of an azure plume, and within the circlet of a band of gems.
No sooner did I see that his attention was riveted on them, and that I might gaze without being observed, than my eyes were drawn involuntarily to his face; I could not keep their lids under control: they would rise, and the irids would fix on him.
It was from companionship with this baby-phantom I had been roused on that moonlight night when I heard the cry; and it was on the afternoon of the day following I was summoned downstairs by a message that some one wanted me in Mrs. Fairfax’s room.
Let there be no opposition, and no discussion about it; let us agree amongst each other, and decide the point at once.”

“This is acting on first impulses; you must take days to consider such a matter, ere your word can be regarded as valid.”

“Oh!
In the course of my necessary correspondence with Mr. Briggs about the will, I had inquired if he knew anything of Mr. Rochester’s present residence and state of health; but, as St. John had conjectured, he was quite ignorant of all concerning him.
In the resolute readiness with which you cut your wealth into four shares, keeping but one to yourself, and relinquishing the three others to the claim of abstract justice, I recognised a soul that revelled in the flame and excitement of sacrifice.
If you wash your face and brush your hair, it will be all right: but you are so dirty!”

She gazed concernedly at the dusky fingers she held in her own, and also at her dress; which she feared had gained no embellishment from its contact with his.
That is the glass—the mirror, Mrs. Linton; and you see yourself in it, and there am I too by your side.”

Trembling and bewildered, she held me fast, but the horror gradually passed from her countenance; its paleness gave place to a glow of shame.
Besides, I reminded him that the child Hareton was his wife’s nephew, and, in the absence of nearer kin, he ought to act as its guardian; and he ought to and must inquire how the property was left, and look over the concerns of his brother-in-law.
He’ll not seem to you so gentle and kind at first, perhaps, because it is not his way: still, mind you, be frank and cordial with him; and naturally he’ll be fonder of you than any uncle, for you are his own.”

“Black hair and eyes!” mused Linton.
This promise poorly pacified her; but time was more potent; and though still at intervals she inquired of her father when Linton would return, before she did see him again his features had waxed so dim in her memory that she did not recognise him.
There, sit down, and think over your wickedness.”

They had got me by this time into the apartment indicated by Mrs. Reed, and had thrust me upon a stool: my impulse was to rise from it like a spring; their two pair of hands arrested me instantly.
I pronounced his name, offering him at the same time my hand: he took it, smiling and saying, “We shall do very well by-and-by.” Then he laid me down, and addressing Bessie, charged her to be very careful that I was not disturbed during the night.
I too rose reluctantly; it was bitter cold, and I dressed as well as I could for shivering, and washed when there was a basin at liberty, which did not occur soon, as there was but one basin to six girls, on the stands down the middle of the room.
She was not, I was told, in the hospital portion of the house with the fever patients; for her complaint was consumption, not typhus: and by consumption I, in my ignorance, understood something mild, which time and care would be sure to alleviate.
He was moody, too; unaccountably so; I more than once, when sent for to read to him, found him sitting in his library alone, with his head bent on his folded arms; and, when he looked up, a morose, almost a malignant, scowl blackened his features.
It had heretofore been my habit always to shrink from arrogance: received as I had been to-day, I should, a year ago, have resolved to quit Gateshead the very next morning; now, it was disclosed to me all at once that that would be a foolish plan.
I must be careful of you, my treasure: nerves like yours were not made for rough handling.”

“Sir, depend on it, my nerves were not in fault; the thing was real: the transaction actually took place.”

“And your previous dreams, were they real too?
There was such deep remorse in his eye, such true pity in his tone, such manly energy in his manner; and besides, there was such unchanged love in his whole look and mien—I forgave him all: yet not in words, not outwardly; only at my heart’s core.
They had been in London, and many other grand towns; but they always said there was no place like home; and then they were so agreeable with each other—never fell out nor “threaped.” She did not know where there was such a family for being united.
Meanwhile, the young man had slung on to his person a decidedly shabby upper garment, and, erecting himself before the blaze, looked down on me from the corner of his eyes, for all the world as if there were some mortal feud unavenged between us.
I was condemned to hear all out: finally, he reached the “First of the Seventy-First.” At that crisis, a sudden inspiration descended on me; I was moved to rise and denounce Jabez Branderham as the sinner of the sin that no Christian need pardon.
On coming back a few days afterwards (for I did not consider my banishment perpetual), I found they had christened him “Heathcliff”: it was the name of a son who died in childhood, and it has served him ever since, both for Christian and surname.
We got rid of all gloom in the excitement of the exercise, and our pleasure was increased by the arrival of the Gimmerton band, mustering fifteen strong: a trumpet, a trombone, clarionets, bassoons, French horns, and a bass viol, besides singers.
What malevolence you must have to wish to convince me that there is no happiness in the world!”

Whether she would have got over this fancy if left to herself, or persevered in nursing it perpetually, I cannot say: she had little time to reflect.
I swear that I meditate no harm: I don’t desire to cause any disturbance, or to exasperate or insult Mr. Linton; I only wish to hear from herself how she is, and why she has been ill; and to ask if anything that I could do would be of use to her.
She seemed willing to do her best; though she thrust the hearth-brush into the grates in mistake for the poker, and malappropriated several other articles of her craft: but I retired, confiding in her energy for a resting-place against my return.
What makes you so venturesome and hardy?”

“Why, I shall soon be away from you, and besides”—I was going to say something about what had passed between me and Mrs. Reed, but on second thoughts I considered it better to remain silent on that head.
No; I cannot believe that: I hold another creed: which no one ever taught me, and which I seldom mention; but in which I delight, and to which I cling: for it extends hope to all: it makes Eternity a rest—a mighty home, not a terror and an abyss.
“You will when you are out of the country: when you get back to Spanish Town, you may think of her as dead and buried—or rather, you need not think of her at all.”

“Impossible to forget this night!”

“It is not impossible: have some energy, man.
Then I repaired to the library to ascertain whether the fire was lit, for, though summer, I knew on such a gloomy evening Mr. Rochester would like to see a cheerful hearth when he came in: yes, the fire had been kindled some time, and burnt well.
The gale still rising, seemed to my ear to muffle a mournful under-sound; whether in the house or abroad I could not at first tell, but it recurred, doubtful yet doleful at every lull; at last I made out it must be some dog howling at a distance.
will you hear reason?” (he stooped and approached his lips to my ear); “because, if you won’t, I’ll try violence.” His voice was hoarse; his look that of a man who is just about to burst an insufferable bond and plunge headlong into wild license.
I struck straight into the heath; I held on to a hollow I saw deeply furrowing the brown moorside; I waded knee-deep in its dark growth; I turned with its turnings, and finding a moss-blackened granite crag in a hidden angle, I sat down under it.
Oh, I wish I could make you see how much my mind is at this moment like a rayless dungeon, with one shrinking fear fettered in its depths—the fear of being persuaded by you to attempt what I cannot accomplish!”

“I have an answer for you—hear it.
CHAPTER XVI
About twelve o’clock that night was born the Catherine you saw at Wuthering Heights: a puny, seven-months’ child; and two hours after the mother died, having never recovered sufficient consciousness to miss Heathcliff, or know Edgar.
May the Lord—’

“Heathcliff gave him a push on to his knees in the middle of the blood, and flung a towel to him; but instead of proceeding to dry it up, he joined his hands and began a prayer, which excited my laughter from its odd phraseology.
His brightening mind brightened his features, and added spirit and nobility to their aspect: I could hardly fancy it the same individual I had beheld on the day I discovered my little lady at Wuthering Heights, after her expedition to the Crags.
He and Joseph were conversing about some farming business; he gave clear, minute directions concerning the matter discussed, but he spoke rapidly, and turned his head continually aside, and had the same excited expression, even more exaggerated.
Mr. Reed had been dead nine years: it was in this chamber he breathed his last; here he lay in state; hence his coffin was borne by the undertaker’s men; and, since that day, a sense of dreary consecration had guarded it from frequent intrusion.
I was still looking at them, and also at intervals examining the teachers—none of whom precisely pleased me; for the stout one was a little coarse, the dark one not a little fierce, the foreigner harsh and grotesque, and Miss Miller, poor thing!
It seems they had come in the carriage with their reverend relative, and had been conducting a rummaging scrutiny of the room upstairs, while he transacted business with the housekeeper, questioned the laundress, and lectured the superintendent.
Teachers and pupils may look coldly on you for a day or two, but friendly feelings are concealed in their hearts; and if you persevere in doing well, these feelings will ere long appear so much the more evidently for their temporary suppression.
I ought to have replied that it was not easy to give an impromptu answer to a question about appearances; that tastes mostly differ; and that beauty is of little consequence, or something of that sort.”

“You ought to have replied no such thing.
During the early part of the morning, I momentarily expected his coming; he was not in the frequent habit of entering the schoolroom, but he did step in for a few minutes sometimes, and I had the impression that he was sure to visit it that day.
Come, set to work.”

Mr. Rochester drew back the thick curtain, drew up the holland blind, let in all the daylight he could; and I was surprised and cheered to see how far dawn was advanced: what rosy streaks were beginning to brighten the east.
Whither will that spirit—now struggling to quit its material tenement—flit when at length released?”

In pondering the great mystery, I thought of Helen Burns, recalled her dying words—her faith—her doctrine of the equality of disembodied souls.
I could not forget my own sensations when you thus started up and poured out the venom of your mind: I felt fear as if an animal that I had struck or pushed had looked up at me with human eyes and cursed me in a man’s voice.—Bring me some water!
I do not want to leave him—I cannot leave him.”

“How are you now, Jane?”

“Much better, sir; I shall be well soon.”

“Taste the wine again, Jane.”

I obeyed him; then he put the glass on the table, stood before me, and looked at me attentively.
A Pious Discourse delivered by the Reverend Jabez Branderham, in the Chapel of Gimmerden Sough.” And while I was, half-consciously, worrying my brain to guess what Jabez Branderham would make of his subject, I sank back in bed, and fell asleep.
it was beautiful—a splendid place carpeted with crimson, and crimson-covered chairs and tables, and a pure white ceiling bordered by gold, a shower of glass-drops hanging in silver chains from the centre, and shimmering with little soft tapers.
Old Mrs. Linton paid us several visits, to be sure, and set things to rights, and scolded and ordered us all; and when Catherine was convalescent, she insisted on conveying her to Thrushcross Grange: for which deliverance we were very grateful.
From Mr. Earnshaw and his companions she kept aloof; and tutored by Kenneth, and serious threats of a fit that often attended her rages, her brother allowed her whatever she pleased to demand, and generally avoided aggravating her fiery temper.
And she has fasted ever since the day before yesterday’s walk, from sorrow and rage that I despatched her out of your society under the idea of its being unacceptable.”

“I think you belie her,” said Heathcliff, twisting his chair to face them.
But, at last, I think she begins to know me: I don’t perceive the silly smiles and grimaces that provoked me at first; and the senseless incapability of discerning that I was in earnest when I gave her my opinion of her infatuation and herself.
Catherine caught and perused it eagerly; then she put a few questions to me concerning the inmates, rational and irrational, of her former home; and gazing towards the hills, murmured in soliloquy:

“I should like to be riding Minny down there!
He began to teach himself to read once; and, because I laughed, he burned his books, and dropped it: was he not a fool?”

“Were not you naughty?” I said; “answer me that.”

“Perhaps I was,” she went on; “but I did not expect him to be so silly.
Mr. Hareton, I wonder you should have no more wit than to go and make that mess at her bidding!”

“I’d forgotten they were Joseph’s,” answered Earnshaw, rather puzzled; “but I’ll tell him I did it.”

We always ate our meals with Mr. Heathcliff.
I abhor artifice, particularly in children; it is my duty to show you that tricks will not answer: you will now stay here an hour longer, and it is only on condition of perfect submission and stillness that I shall liberate you then.”

“O aunt!
But, to the little ones at least, this was denied: each hearth in the schoolroom was immediately surrounded by a double row of great girls, and behind them the younger children crouched in groups, wrapping their starved arms in their pinafores.
you think too much of the love of human beings; you are too impulsive, too vehement; the sovereign hand that created your frame, and put life into it, has provided you with other resources than your feeble self, or than creatures feeble as you.
That beck itself was then a torrent, turbid and curbless: it tore asunder the wood, and sent a raving sound through the air, often thickened with wild rain or whirling sleet; and for the forest on its banks, that showed only ranks of skeletons.
She appeared to be on her high horse to-night; both her words and her air seemed intended to excite not only the admiration, but the amazement of her auditors: she was evidently bent on striking them as something very dashing and daring indeed.
She was very showy, but she was not genuine: she had a fine person, many brilliant attainments; but her mind was poor, her heart barren by nature: nothing bloomed spontaneously on that soil; no unforced natural fruit delighted by its freshness.
Mr. Rochester has a wife now living.”

My nerves vibrated to those low-spoken words as they had never vibrated to thunder—my blood felt their subtle violence as it had never felt frost or fire; but I was collected, and in no danger of swooning.
If you’ve any followers—housebreakers or such like—anywhere near, you may tell them we are not by ourselves in the house; we have a gentleman, and dogs, and guns.” Here the honest but inflexible servant clapped the door to and bolted it within.
“It is all very well for the present,” said he; “but seriously, I trust that when the first flush of vivacity is over, you will look a little higher than domestic endearments and household joys.”

“The best things the world has!” I interrupted.
Doing nothing, expecting nothing; merging night in day; feeling but the sensation of cold when I let the fire go out, of hunger when I forgot to eat: and then a ceaseless sorrow, and, at times, a very delirium of desire to behold my Jane again.
I saw they were full of stupid admiration; she is so immeasurably superior to them—to everybody on earth, is she not, Nelly?”

“There will more come of this business than you reckon on,” I answered, covering him up and extinguishing the light.
It’s like a colt’s mane over his eyes!”

He ventured this remark without any intention to insult; but Heathcliff’s violent nature was not prepared to endure the appearance of impertinence from one whom he seemed to hate, even then, as a rival.
There was no moon, and everything beneath lay in misty darkness: not a light gleamed from any house, far or near all had been extinguished long ago: and those at Wuthering Heights were never visible—still she asserted she caught their shining.
There was unobstructed admittance on that side also; and at the door sat my old friend Nelly Dean, sewing and singing a song; which was often interrupted from within by harsh words of scorn and intolerance, uttered in far from musical accents.
“Have you cried your grief away?”

“I am afraid I never shall do that.”

“Why?”

“Because I have been wrongly accused; and you, ma’am, and everybody else, will now think me wicked.”

“We shall think you what you prove yourself to be, my child.
I had had no communication by letter or message with the outer world: school-rules, school-duties, school-habits and notions, and voices, and faces, and phrases, and costumes, and preferences, and antipathies—such was what I knew of existence.
Besides, since happiness is irrevocably denied me, I have a right to get pleasure out of life: and I will get it, cost what it may.”

“Then you will degenerate still more, sir.”

“Possibly: yet why should I, if I can get sweet, fresh pleasure?
But unluckily the Varens, six months before, had given me this filette Adèle, who, she affirmed, was my daughter; and perhaps she may be, though I see no proofs of such grim paternity written in her countenance: Pilot is more like me than she.
The side-passage door was fastened; I opened it with as little noise as possible: all the yard was quiet; but the gates stood wide open, and there was a post-chaise, with horses ready harnessed, and driver seated on the box, stationed outside.
I bethought myself to go upstairs and see how the dying woman sped, who lay there almost unheeded: the very servants paid her but a remittent attention: the hired nurse, being little looked after, would slip out of the room whenever she could.
What does that inexplicable, that uncanny turn of countenance mean?”

“I was thinking, sir (you will excuse the idea; it was involuntary), I was thinking of Hercules and Samson with their charmers—”

“You were, you little elfish—”

“Hush, sir!
or you have overheard the servants talk?—your sensitive self-respect has been wounded?”

“No, sir.” It struck twelve—I waited till the time-piece had concluded its silver chime, and the clock its hoarse, vibrating stroke, and then I proceeded.
Hey Wolf, holld him, holld him!”

On opening the little door, two hairy monsters flew at my throat, bearing me down, and extinguishing the light; while a mingled guffaw from Heathcliff and Hareton put the copestone on my rage and humiliation.
Not a soul knew to whom it belonged, he said; and his money and time being both limited, he thought it better to take it home with him at once, than run into vain expenses there: because he was determined he would not leave it as he found it.
In the first place, he had by that time lost the benefit of his early education: continual hard work, begun soon and concluded late, had extinguished any curiosity he once possessed in pursuit of knowledge, and any love for books or learning.
Bring the person in, if it be anyone particular.” Ere long, I heard the click of the latch, and Catherine flew upstairs, breathless and wild; too excited to show gladness: indeed, by her face, you would rather have surmised an awful calamity.
“Have you no fear of the consequences, Mrs. Linton?”

“None for my friend,” she replied: “his strong head will keep him from danger; a little for Hindley: but he can’t be made morally worse than he is; and I stand between him and bodily harm.
“Heathcliff has your permission to come a-courting to Miss, and to drop in at every opportunity your absence offers, on purpose to poison the mistress against you?”

Confused as Catherine was, her wits were alert at applying our conversation.
And there was double cause to desire it, for on her existence depended that of another: we cherished the hope that in a little while Mr. Linton’s heart would be gladdened, and his lands secured from a stranger’s grip, by the birth of an heir.
There shall be an explanation as soon as I can give it; only just have the goodness to step out and order the carriage to take me on to Gimmerton, and tell a servant to seek up a few clothes in my wardrobe.”

The intruder was Mrs. Heathcliff.
“I know where I wish to go; where a colony of moor-game are settled: I want to see whether they have made their nests yet.”

“That must be a good distance up,” I answered; “they don’t breed on the edge of the moor.”

“No, it’s not,” she said.
His handsome features glowed with pleasure, and his eyes kept impatiently wandering from the page to a small white hand over his shoulder, which recalled him by a smart slap on the cheek, whenever its owner detected such signs of inattention.
Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep; I had not long slumbered when the sudden cessation of motion awoke me; the coach-door was open, and a person like a servant was standing at it: I saw her face and dress by the light of the lamps.
This ominous tool she presented to Miss Scatcherd with a respectful curtesy; then she quietly, and without being told, unloosed her pinafore, and the teacher instantly and sharply inflicted on her neck a dozen strokes with the bunch of twigs.
Probably, if I had lately left a good home and kind parents, this would have been the hour when I should most keenly have regretted the separation; that wind would then have saddened my heart; this obscure chaos would have disturbed my peace!
The subject seemed strangely chosen for an infant singer; but I suppose the point of the exhibition lay in hearing the notes of love and jealousy warbled with the lisp of childhood; and in very bad taste that point was: at least I thought so.
By-the-bye, I must have mine in mind; it won’t do to neglect her; she is a Fairfax, or wed to one; and blood is said to be thicker than water.”

He rang, and despatched an invitation to Mrs. Fairfax, who soon arrived, knitting-basket in hand.
Happening to call one evening when Céline did not expect me, I found her out; but it was a warm night, and I was tired with strolling through Paris, so I sat down in her boudoir; happy to breathe the air consecrated so lately by her presence.
In the servants’ hall two coachmen and three gentlemen’s gentlemen stood or sat round the fire; the abigails, I suppose, were upstairs with their mistresses; the new servants, that had been hired from Millcote, were bustling about everywhere.
Meantime, while I thought only of my master and his future bride—saw only them, heard only their discourse, and considered only their movements of importance—the rest of the party were occupied with their own separate interests and pleasures.
Won’t she feel forsaken and deserted?”

“Impossible!—when I told you how she, on the contrary, deserted me: the idea of my insolvency cooled, or rather extinguished, her flame in a moment.”

“You have a curious, designing mind, Mr. Rochester.
Why do you remain pertinaciously perched on my knee, when I have given you notice to quit?”

“Because I am comfortable there.”

“No, Jane, you are not comfortable there, because your heart is not with me: it is with this cousin—this St. John.
My human fixture and her satellites rushed to welcome me; exclaiming, tumultuously, they had completely given me up: everybody conjectured that I perished last night; and they were wondering how they must set about the search for my remains.
“No accident, I hope?” “At Thrushcross Grange,” he answered; “and I would have been there too, but they had not the manners to ask me to stay.” “Well, you will catch it!” I said: “you’ll never be content till you’re sent about your business.
Her companion rose up, but he hadn’t time to express his feelings further, for a horse’s feet were heard on the flags, and having knocked gently, young Linton entered, his face brilliant with delight at the unexpected summon he had received.
The flash of her eyes had been succeeded by a dreamy and melancholy softness; they no longer gave the impression of looking at the objects around her: they appeared always to gaze beyond, and far beyond—you would have said out of this world.
I believe Linton had laid it there: for she never endeavoured to divert herself with reading, or occupation of any kind, and he would spend many an hour in trying to entice her attention to some subject which had formerly been her amusement.
At first she sat silent; but that could not last: she had resolved to make a pet of her little cousin, as she would have him to be; and she commenced stroking his curls, and kissing his cheek, and offering him tea in her saucer, like a baby.
“I will try.”

“Would you like to drink, or could you eat anything?”

“No, thank you, Bessie.”

“Then I think I shall go to bed, for it is past twelve o’clock; but you may call me if you want anything in the night.”

Wonderful civility this!
CHAPTER IV
From my discourse with Mr. Lloyd, and from the above reported conference between Bessie and Abbot, I gathered enough of hope to suffice as a motive for wishing to get well: a change seemed near,—I desired and waited it in silence.
It was Miss Reed that found them out: I believe she was envious; and now she and her sister lead a cat and dog life together; they are always quarrelling—”

“Well, and what of John Reed?”

“Oh, he is not doing so well as his mama could wish.
A very chill and vault-like air pervaded the stairs and gallery, suggesting cheerless ideas of space and solitude; and I was glad, when finally ushered into my chamber, to find it of small dimensions, and furnished in ordinary, modern style.
I wanted again to introduce the subject of Grace Poole, and to hear what he would answer; I wanted to ask him plainly if he really believed it was she who had made last night’s hideous attempt; and if so, why he kept her wickedness a secret.
The crimson curtain hung before the arch: slight as was the separation this drapery formed from the party in the adjoining saloon, they spoke in so low a key that nothing of their conversation could be distinguished beyond a soothing murmur.
I gazed on it with gloom and pain: nothing soft, nothing sweet, nothing pitying, or hopeful, or subduing did it inspire; only a grating anguish for her woes—not my loss—and a sombre tearless dismay at the fearfulness of death in such a form.
And this is what I wished to have” (laying his hand on my shoulder): “this young girl, who stands so grave and quiet at the mouth of hell, looking collectedly at the gambols of a demon, I wanted her just as a change after that fierce ragout.
Grace has, on the whole, proved a good keeper; though, owing partly to a fault of her own, of which it appears nothing can cure her, and which is incident to her harassing profession, her vigilance has been more than once lulled and baffled.
I think you good, gifted, lovely: a fervent, a solemn passion is conceived in my heart; it leans to you, draws you to my centre and spring of life, wraps my existence about you, and, kindling in pure, powerful flame, fuses you and me in one.
Where do you come from?”

“I am a stranger.”

“What is your business here at this hour?”

“I want a night’s shelter in an out-house or anywhere, and a morsel of bread to eat.”

Distrust, the very feeling I dreaded, appeared in Hannah’s face.
I felt the consecration of its loneliness: my eye feasted on the outline of swell and sweep—on the wild colouring communicated to ridge and dell by moss, by heath-bell, by flower-sprinkled turf, by brilliant bracken, and mellow granite crag.
At that moment a little accident supervened, which seemed decreed by fate purposely to prove the truth of the adage, that “misfortunes never come singly,” and to add to their distresses the vexing one of the slip between the cup and the lip.
I felt my heels and coat-laps peculiar subjects of assault; and parrying off the larger combatants as effectually as I could with the poker, I was constrained to demand, aloud, assistance from some of the household in re-establishing peace.
Cathy sat up late, having a world of things to order for the reception of her new friends: she came into the kitchen once to speak to her old one; but he was gone, and she only stayed to ask what was the matter with him, and then went back.
“As it rains, I hardly expect them; but they may come, and if they do, you run the risk of being scolded for no good.”

“Order Ellen to say you are engaged, Cathy,” he persisted; “don’t turn me out for those pitiful, silly friends of yours!
I’m sure Mr. Edgar will excuse me.”

“I hate you to be fidgeting in my presence,” exclaimed the young lady imperiously, not allowing her guest time to speak: she had failed to recover her equanimity since the little dispute with Heathcliff.
But they are very much alike: they are spoiled children, and fancy the world was made for their accommodation; and though I humour both, I think a smart chastisement might improve them all the same.”

“You’re mistaken, Mrs. Linton,” said I.
I could not pursue them, however; and I dared not rouse the family, and fill the place with confusion; still less unfold the business to my master, absorbed as he was in his present calamity, and having no heart to spare for a second grief!
“Send that over to-morrow,” said Heathcliff to me; then turning to her, he added: “You may do without your pony: it is a fine evening, and you’ll need no ponies at Wuthering Heights; for what journeys you take, your own feet will serve you.
“Something passed her, all dressed in white, and vanished”—“A great black dog behind him”—“Three loud raps on the chamber door”—“A light in the churchyard just over his grave,” &c., &c.

At last both slept: the fire and the candle went out.
It is to be feared the same could not be said of you were you to be called hence.”

Not being in a condition to remove his doubt, I only cast my eyes down on the two large feet planted on the rug, and sighed, wishing myself far enough away.
I dare say now if I were to ask you for a kiss you wouldn’t give it me: you’d say you’d rather not.”

“I’ll kiss you and welcome: bend your head down.” Bessie stooped; we mutually embraced, and I followed her into the house quite comforted.
I had left this woman in bitterness and hate, and I came back to her now with no other emotion than a sort of ruth for her great sufferings, and a strong yearning to forget and forgive all injuries—to be reconciled and clasp hands in amity.
“Are you going to seek Mr. Rochester?”

“I must find out what is become of him.”

“It remains for me, then,” he said, “to remember you in my prayers, and to entreat God for you, in all earnestness, that you may not indeed become a castaway.
If any listener had heard me, he would have thought me mad: I pronounced them with such frantic energy.”

“And it was last Monday night, somewhere near midnight?”

“Yes; but the time is of no consequence: what followed is the strange point.
I said she was my daughter-in-law: therefore, she must have married my son.”

“And this young man is—”

“Not my son, assuredly.”

Heathcliff smiled again, as if it were rather too bold a jest to attribute the paternity of that bear to him.
The distance from the gate to the grange is two miles; I believe I managed to make it four, what with losing myself among the trees, and sinking up to the neck in snow: a predicament which only those who have experienced it can appreciate.
I declare he is that strange acquisition my late neighbour made, in his journey to Liverpool—a little Lascar, or an American or Spanish castaway.’

“‘A wicked boy, at all events,’ remarked the old lady, ‘and quite unfit for a decent house!
Heathcliff,” said I, “this is the talk of a madman; your wife, most likely, is convinced you are mad; and, for that reason, she has borne with you hitherto: but now that you say she may go, she’ll doubtless avail herself of the permission.
I see a repose that neither earth nor hell can break, and I feel an assurance of the endless and shadowless hereafter—the Eternity they have entered—where life is boundless in its duration, and love in its sympathy, and joy in its fulness.
You may also tell him that the mother of Linton desired him to remain under my guardianship; and, at present, his health is very precarious.”

“Noa!” said Joseph, giving a thud with his prop on the floor, and assuming an authoritative air.
My curiosity and suspicions were roused; I determined to take a peep at her mysterious treasures; so, at night, as soon as she and my master were safe upstairs, I searched, and readily found among my house keys one that would fit the lock.
I think I should not be peevish with you: you’d not provoke me, and you’d always be ready to help me, wouldn’t you?”

“Yes,” said Catherine, stroking his long soft hair: “if I could only get papa’s consent, I’d spend half my time with you.
I scolded the stupid fellows well for listening to that tale, which I would not carry to my master; resolving to take a whole bevy up to the Heights, at day-light, and storm it literally, unless the prisoner were quietly surrendered to us.
And I defy you to hurt him when I am by, and I defy you to frighten me!”

“You are a boastful champion,” replied Heathcliff; “but I don’t like you well enough to hurt him: you shall get the full benefit of the torment, as long as it lasts.
I knew no living thing in flesh and blood was by; but, as certainly as you perceive the approach to some substantial body in the dark, though it cannot be discerned, so certainly I felt that Cathy was there: not under me, but on the earth.
At least, have a drink of our old ale; it will do you good: you seem weary.”

She hastened to fetch it before I could refuse, and I heard Joseph asking whether “it warn’t a crying scandal that she should have followers at her time of life?
Willingly would I now have gone and asked Mrs. Reed’s pardon; but I knew, partly from experience and partly from instinct, that was the way to make her repulse me with double scorn, thereby re-exciting every turbulent impulse of my nature.
The Sunday evening was spent in repeating, by heart, the Church Catechism, and the fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of St. Matthew; and in listening to a long sermon, read by Miss Miller, whose irrepressible yawns attested her weariness.
The few who continued well were allowed almost unlimited license; because the medical attendant insisted on the necessity of frequent exercise to keep them in health: and had it been otherwise, no one had leisure to watch or restrain them.
Having descended a staircase, traversed a portion of the house below, and succeeded in opening and shutting, without noise, two doors, I reached another flight of steps; these I mounted, and then just opposite to me was Miss Temple’s room.
It was very near, but not yet in sight; when, in addition to the tramp, tramp, I heard a rush under the hedge, and close down by the hazel stems glided a great dog, whose black and white colour made him a distinct object against the trees.
I answered—

“I did not wish to disturb you, as you seemed engaged, sir.”

“What have you been doing during my absence?”

“Nothing particular; teaching Adèle as usual.”

“And getting a good deal paler than you were—as I saw at first sight.
“If you like, miss,” said Sam, “I’ll wait in the hall for you; and if she frightens you, just call and I’ll come in.”

“No, Sam, return to the kitchen: I am not in the least afraid.” Nor was I; but I was a good deal interested and excited.
When I was a little girl, only six years old, I one night heard Bessie Leaven say to Martha Abbot that she had been dreaming about a little child; and that to dream of children was a sure sign of trouble, either to one’s self or one’s kin.
“Missis is awake,” said she; “I have told her you are here: come and let us see if she will know you.”

I did not need to be guided to the well-known room, to which I had so often been summoned for chastisement or reprimand in former days.
You are not one of the Gibsons; and yet I know you—that face, and the eyes and forehead, are quiet familiar to me: you are like—why, you are like Jane Eyre!”

I said nothing: I was afraid of occasioning some shock by declaring my identity.
I would fain have spoken to her, but my hand was held by a grasp of iron: I was hurried along by a stride I could hardly follow; and to look at Mr. Rochester’s face was to feel that not a second of delay would be tolerated for any purpose.
“One night I had been awakened by her yells—(since the medical men had pronounced her mad, she had, of course, been shut up)—it was a fiery West Indian night; one of the description that frequently precede the hurricanes of those climates.
She made such a report of me to her father, that Mr. Oliver himself accompanied her next evening—a tall, massive-featured, middle-aged, and grey-headed man, at whose side his lovely daughter looked like a bright flower near a hoary turret.
My cousins, full of exhilaration, were so eloquent in narrative and comment, that their fluency covered St. John’s taciturnity: he was sincerely glad to see his sisters; but in their glow of fervour and flow of joy he could not sympathise.
Consider a moment—your strong sense will guide you.”

I did consider; and still my sense, such as it was, directed me only to the fact that we did not love each other as man and wife should: and therefore it inferred we ought not to marry.
But go after him; he is now lingering in the passage expecting you—he will make it up.”

I have not much pride under such circumstances: I would always rather be happy than dignified; and I ran after him—he stood at the foot of the stairs.
Heathcliff had never been heard of since the evening of the thunder-storm; and, one day, I had the misfortune, when she had provoked me exceedingly, to lay the blame of his disappearance on her: where indeed it belonged, as she well knew.
And if you flatter yourself that I don’t perceive it, you are a fool; and if you think I can be consoled by sweet words, you are an idiot: and if you fancy I’ll suffer unrevenged, I’ll convince you of the contrary, in a very little while!
Finally, she dived into a hollow; and before I came in sight of her again, she was two miles nearer Wuthering Heights than her own home; and I beheld a couple of persons arrest her, one of whom I felt convinced was Mr. Heathcliff himself.
CHAPTER XXXIII
On the morrow of that Monday, Earnshaw being still unable to follow his ordinary employments, and therefore remaining about the house, I speedily found it would be impracticable to retain my charge beside me, as heretofore.
He took the book from his hand, and glanced at the open page, then returned it without any observation; merely signing Catherine away: her companion lingered very little behind her, and I was about to depart also, but he bid me sit still.
Men too often confound them: they should not be confounded: appearance should not be mistaken for truth; narrow human doctrines, that only tend to elate and magnify a few, should not be substituted for the world-redeeming creed of Christ.
The said Eliza, John, and Georgiana were now clustered round their mama in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside, and with her darlings about her (for the time neither quarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly happy.
What a fury to fly at Master John!”

“Did ever anybody see such a picture of passion!”

Then Mrs. Reed subjoined—

“Take her away to the red-room, and lock her in there.” Four hands were immediately laid upon me, and I was borne upstairs.
I felt the impression of woe as she spoke, but I could not tell whence it came; and when, having done speaking, she breathed a little fast and coughed a short cough, I momentarily forgot my own sorrows to yield to a vague concern for her.
One thing specially surprised me, and that was, there were no journeyings backward and forward, no visits to Ingram Park: to be sure it was twenty miles off, on the borders of another county; but what was that distance to an ardent lover?
I say again, I am glad!”

I walked fast through the room: I stopped, half suffocated with the thoughts that rose faster than I could receive, comprehend, settle them:—thoughts of what might, could, would, and should be, and that ere long.
When Kenneth warned him that his medicines were useless at that stage of the malady, and he needn’t put him to further expense by attending her, he retorted, “I know you need not—she’s well—she does not want any more attendance from you!
Your presence is a moral poison that would contaminate the most virtuous: for that cause, and to prevent worse consequences, I shall deny you hereafter admission into this house, and give notice now that I require your instant departure.
“Yah’s see all t’ bed-rumes thear is—yon’s mine.”

He pointed into the second garret, only differing from the first in being more naked about the walls, and having a large, low, curtainless bed, with an indigo-coloured quilt, at one end.
Hareton offered to go with her, and I thought he should: it’s a wild road over the hills.”

Hareton, during the discussion, stood with his hands in his pockets, too awkward to speak; though he looked as if he did not relish my intrusion.
It was sweet, warm weather—too warm for travelling; but the heat did not hinder me from enjoying the delightful scenery above and below: had I seen it nearer August, I’m sure it would have tempted me to waste a month among its solitudes.
My heart beat thick, my head grew hot; a sound filled my ears, which I deemed the rushing of wings; something seemed near me; I was oppressed, suffocated: endurance broke down; I rushed to the door and shook the lock in desperate effort.
A change had taken place in the weather the preceding evening, and a keen north-east wind, whistling through the crevices of our bedroom windows all night long, had made us shiver in our beds, and turned the contents of the ewers to ice.
I examined, too, in thought, the possibility of my ever being able to translate currently a certain little French story which Madame Pierrot had that day shown me; nor was that problem solved to my satisfaction ere I fell sweetly asleep.
The teachers were fully occupied with packing up and making other necessary preparations for the departure of those girls who were fortunate enough to have friends and relations able and willing to remove them from the seat of contagion.
A more reassuring introduction for a new governess could scarcely be conceived; there was no grandeur to overwhelm, no stateliness to embarrass; and then, as I entered, the old lady got up and promptly and kindly came forward to meet me.
Men and women die; philosophers falter in wisdom, and Christians in goodness: if any one you know has suffered and erred, let him look higher than his equals for strength to amend and solace to heal.”

“But the instrument—the instrument!
In the eyes of the world, I was doubtless covered with grimy dishonour; but I resolved to be clean in my own sight—and to the last I repudiated the contamination of her crimes, and wrenched myself from connection with her mental defects.
I am poor; for I find that, when I have paid my father’s debts, all the patrimony remaining to me will be this crumbling grange, the row of scathed firs behind, and the patch of moorish soil, with the yew-trees and holly-bushes in front.
I am sure it would benefit him to talk a little about this sweet Rosamond, whom he thinks he ought not to marry: I will make him talk.”

I said first, “Take a chair, Mr. Rivers.” But he answered, as he always did, that he could not stay.
As our mutual happiness (i.e., Diana’s, Mary’s, and mine) settled into a quieter character, and we resumed our usual habits and regular studies, St. John stayed more at home: he sat with us in the same room, sometimes for hours together.
Both by nature and principle, he was superior to the mean gratification of vengeance: he had forgiven me for saying I scorned him and his love, but he had not forgotten the words; and as long as he and I lived he never would forget them.
At any rate, it shall be strong enough to search—inquire—to grope an outlet from this cloud of doubt, and find the open day of certainty.”

It was the first of June; yet the morning was overcast and chilly: rain beat fast on my casement.
He hung about me for a while, and having screwed up his courage, exclaimed abruptly—“Nelly, make me decent, I’m going to be good.”

“High time, Heathcliff,” I said; “you have grieved Catherine: she’s sorry she ever came home, I daresay!
When she did come, Heathcliff came with her, and she insisted that I should take him into the kitchen, as my fellow-servant had gone to a neighbour’s, to be removed from the sound of our “devil’s psalmody,” as it pleased him to call it.
Edgar Linton came yesterday by chance, Hindley; and it was I who told him to be off: because I knew you would not like to have met him as you were.”

“You lie, Cathy, no doubt,” answered her brother, “and you are a confounded simpleton!
because there is no reason for my lingering another minute, if you persist in your stubborn ill-nature!”

Well, Mr. Lockwood, I argued and complained, and flatly refused him fifty times; but in the long run he forced me to an agreement.
And of Wuthering Heights Catherine was thinking as she listened: that is, if she thought or listened at all; but she had the vague, distant look I mentioned before, which expressed no recognition of material things either by ear or eye.
Good things lost amid a wilderness of weeds, to be sure, whose rankness far over-topped their neglected growth; yet, notwithstanding, evidence of a wealthy soil, that might yield luxuriant crops under other and favourable circumstances.
I love him better than myself, Ellen; and I know it by this: I pray every night that I may live after him; because I would rather be miserable than that he should be: that proves I love him better than myself.”

“Good words,” I replied.
However, he felt that his will had better be altered: instead of leaving Catherine’s fortune at her own disposal, he determined to put it in the hands of trustees for her use during life, and for her children, if she had any, after her.
But my sleep was marred a second time by a sharp ringing of the bell—the only bell we have, put up on purpose for Linton; and the master called to me to see what was the matter, and inform them that he wouldn’t have that noise repeated.
He must have seen Cathy and her cousin about the spot before he examined it, for while his jaws worked like those of a cow chewing its cud, and rendered his speech difficult to understand, he began:—

“I mun hev’ my wage, and I mun goa!
“Mind you don’t,” said Bessie; and when she had ascertained that I was really subsiding, she loosened her hold of me; then she and Miss Abbot stood with folded arms, looking darkly and doubtfully on my face, as incredulous of my sanity.
From this window were visible the porter’s lodge and the carriage-road, and just as I had dissolved so much of the silver-white foliage veiling the panes as left room to look out, I saw the gates thrown open and a carriage roll through.
There are people who seem to have no notion of sketching a character, or observing and describing salient points, either in persons or things: the good lady evidently belonged to this class; my queries puzzled, but did not draw her out.
And yet it is said the Rochesters have been rather a violent than a quiet race in their time: perhaps, though, that is the reason they rest tranquilly in their graves now.”

“Yes—‘after life’s fitful fever they sleep well,’” I muttered.
These last were discussing the stranger; they both called him “a beautiful man.” Louisa said he was “a love of a creature,” and she “adored him;” and Mary instanced his “pretty little mouth, and nice nose,” as her ideal of the charming.
“Yes, bonny wee thing, I’ll wear you in my bosom, lest my jewel I should tyne.”

He said this as he helped me to alight from the carriage, and while he afterwards lifted out Adèle, I entered the house, and made good my retreat upstairs.
Were I not morally certain that your uncle will be dead ere you reach Madeira, I would advise you to accompany Mr. Mason back; but as it is, I think you had better remain in England till you can hear further, either from or of Mr. Eyre.
And, with a strange pang, I now reflected that, long as I had been shut up here, no message had been sent to ask how I was, or to invite me to come down: not even little Adèle had tapped at the door; not even Mrs. Fairfax had sought me.
Out of pity to me and yourself, put your finger on my pulse, feel how it throbs, and—beware!”

He bared his wrist, and offered it to me: the blood was forsaking his cheek and lips, they were growing livid; I was distressed on all hands.
I observed when any one entered or left the apartment: I could even tell who they were; I could understand what was said when the speaker stood near to me; but I could not answer; to open my lips or move my limbs was equally impossible.
“She cried when I told her you were off again this morning.”

“Well, I cried last night,” he returned, “and I had more reason to cry than she.”

“Yes: you had the reason of going to bed with a proud heart and an empty stomach,” said I.
For a few days, I said, he seemed regardless of the puny successor to the departed: that coldness melted as fast as snow in April, and ere the tiny thing could stammer a word or totter a step it wielded a despot’s sceptre in his heart.
However, master, you’ll have plenty of time to get acquainted with him and see whether he would suit her: it wants four years and more to his being of age.’”

Edgar sighed; and, walking to the window, looked out towards Gimmerton Kirk.
“You villain!” I began to cry, “you villain!” A touch on the chest silenced me: I am stout, and soon put out of breath; and, what with that and the rage, I staggered dizzily back and felt ready to suffocate, or to burst a blood-vessel.
“Master Heathcliff,” I resumed, “have you forgotten all Catherine’s kindness to you last winter, when you affirmed you loved her, and when she brought you books and sung you songs, and came many a time through wind and snow to see you?
“Night-walking amuses him, then,” I remarked, affecting a careless manner: in reality as surprised as she was, and anxious to ascertain the truth of her statement; for to see the master looking glad would not be an every-day spectacle.
How shameful!”

A quarter of an hour passed before lessons again began, during which the schoolroom was in a glorious tumult; for that space of time it seemed to be permitted to talk loud and more freely, and they used their privilege.
I saw a girl sitting on a stone bench near; she was bent over a book, on the perusal of which she seemed intent: from where I stood I could see the title—it was “Rasselas;” a name that struck me as strange, and consequently attractive.
Some years older than I, she knew more of the world, and could tell me many things I liked to hear: with her my curiosity found gratification: to my faults also she gave ample indulgence, never imposing curb or rein on anything I said.
The consequence was, that when the moon, which was full and bright (for the night was fine), came in her course to that space in the sky opposite my casement, and looked in at me through the unveiled panes, her glorious gaze roused me.
It trembled for Mr. Rochester and his doom; it bemoaned him with bitter pity; it demanded him with ceaseless longing; and, impotent as a bird with both wings broken, it still quivered its shattered pinions in vain attempts to seek him.
“But I do think hardly of you,” I said; “and I’ll tell you why—not so much because you refused to give me shelter, or regarded me as an impostor, as because you just now made it a species of reproach that I had no ‘brass’ and no house.
He answered quietly—

“I know it.”

I found him a very patient, very forbearing, and yet an exacting master: he expected me to do a great deal; and when I fulfilled his expectations, he, in his own way, fully testified his approbation.
Oh, Jane, what did I feel when I discovered you had fled from Thornfield, and when I could nowhere find you; and, after examining your apartment, ascertained that you had taken no money, nor anything which could serve as an equivalent!
Jane suits me: do I suit her?”

“To the finest fibre of my nature, sir.”

“The case being so, we have nothing in the world to wait for: we must be married instantly.”

He looked and spoke with eagerness: his old impetuosity was rising.
A miser who has parted with a lucky lottery ticket for five shillings, and finds next day he has lost in the bargain five thousand pounds, could not show a blanker countenance than he did on beholding the figure of Mr. Earnshaw above.
Edgar is sulky, because I’m glad of a thing that does not interest him: he refuses to open his mouth, except to utter pettish, silly speeches; and he affirmed I was cruel and selfish for wishing to talk when he was so sick and sleepy.
Earnshaw looked up, like me, to the countenance of our mutual foe; who, absorbed in his anguish, seemed insensible to anything around him: the longer he stood, the plainer his reflections revealed their blackness through his features.
The company of a child of his own age will instil new spirit into him soon, and by wishing for strength he’ll gain it.”

“Ay, if we can keep him!” I mused to myself; and sore misgivings came over me that there was slight hope of that.
“Master Linton,” I cried, seeing we were regularly imprisoned, “you know what your diabolical father is after, and you shall tell us, or I’ll box your ears, as he has done your cousin’s.”

“Yes, Linton, you must tell,” said Catherine.
Suddenly his eye gave a blink, as if it had met something that either dazzled or shocked its pupil; turning, he said in more rapid accents than he had hitherto used—

“Miss Temple, Miss Temple, what—what is that girl with curled hair?
A kind fairy, in my absence, had surely dropped the required suggestion on my pillow; for as I lay down, it came quietly and naturally to my mind:—“Those who want situations advertise; you must advertise in the ——shire Herald.”

“How?
It was a walk of two miles, and the evening was wet, but the days were still long; I visited a shop or two, slipped the letter into the post-office, and came back through heavy rain, with streaming garments, but with a relieved heart.
Neither of them possessed energy or wit to belabour me soundly, but they insulted me as coarsely as they could in their little way: especially Céline, who even waxed rather brilliant on my personal defects—deformities she termed them.
I am not depressed.”

“But I affirm that you are: so much depressed that a few more words would bring tears to your eyes—indeed, they are there now, shining and swimming; and a bead has slipped from the lash and fallen on to the flag.
Having indulged a while in this sedative, she raised her bent body, took the pipe from her lips, and while gazing steadily at the fire, said very deliberately—

“You are cold; you are sick; and you are silly.”

“Prove it,” I rejoined.
A beggar-woman and her little boy—pale, ragged objects both—were coming up the walk, and I ran down and gave them all the money I happened to have in my purse—some three or four shillings: good or bad, they must partake of my jubilee.
for you have neither relatives nor acquaintances whom you need fear to offend by living with me?”

This was true: and while he spoke my very conscience and reason turned traitors against me, and charged me with crime in resisting him.
Not a tie links me to any living thing: not a claim do I possess to admittance under any roof in England.”

“A most singular position at your age!”

Here I saw his glance directed to my hands, which were folded on the table before me.
He had spoken earnestly, mildly: his look was not, indeed, that of a lover beholding his mistress, but it was that of a pastor recalling his wandering sheep—or better, of a guardian angel watching the soul for which he is responsible.
I shall pray for you hourly.—Yours, ST. JOHN.”

“My spirit,” I answered mentally, “is willing to do what is right; and my flesh, I hope, is strong enough to accomplish the will of Heaven, when once that will is distinctly known to me.
He stretched his right hand (the left arm, the mutilated one, he kept hidden in his bosom); he seemed to wish by touch to gain an idea of what lay around him: he met but vacancy still; for the trees were some yards off where he stood.
Time stagnates here: we must surely have retired to rest at eight!”

“Always at nine in winter, and rise at four,” said my host, suppressing a groan: and, as I fancied, by the motion of his arm’s shadow, dashing a tear from his eyes.
He had reached the age of sixteen then, I think, and without having bad features, or being deficient in intellect, he contrived to convey an impression of inward and outward repulsiveness that his present aspect retains no traces of.
I wonder will he have the heart to find a plausible excuse for making love to Miss, when he told you he hated her?”

Mrs. Linton saw Isabella tear herself free, and run into the garden; and a minute after, Heathcliff opened the door.
“Let me alone, at least,” said he; “I can’t bear your talking.”

She lingered, and resisted my persuasions to departure a tiresome while; but as he neither looked up nor spoke, she finally made a movement to the door, and I followed.
I’d rather resign her to God, and lay her in the earth before me.”

“Resign her to God as it is, sir,” I answered, “and if we should lose you—which may He forbid—under His providence, I’ll stand her friend and counsellor to the last.
She must be eight or nine years old.”

“I was knocked down,” was the blunt explanation, jerked out of me by another pang of mortified pride; “but that did not make me ill,” I added; while Mr. Lloyd helped himself to a pinch of snuff.
To this crib I always took my doll; human beings must love something, and, in the dearth of worthier objects of affection, I contrived to find a pleasure in loving and cherishing a faded graven image, shabby as a miniature scarecrow.
I returned it to her; she received it quietly, and without saying anything she was about to relapse into her former studious mood: again I ventured to disturb her—

“Can you tell me what the writing on that stone over the door means?
“She is qualified to teach the usual branches of a good English education, together with French, Drawing, and Music” (in those days, reader, this now narrow catalogue of accomplishments, would have been held tolerably comprehensive).
She had no great talents, no marked traits of character, no peculiar development of feeling or taste which raised her one inch above the ordinary level of childhood; but neither had she any deficiency or vice which sunk her below it.
It was evident that in their former intercourse, the passive disposition of the one had been habitually influenced by the active energy of the other: whence then had arisen Mr. Rochester’s dismay when he heard of Mr. Mason’s arrival?
Take one day; share it into sections; to each section apportion its task: leave no stray unemployed quarters of an hour, ten minutes, five minutes—include all; do each piece of business in its turn with method, with rigid regularity.
I pass over the sort of slur conveyed in this suggestion on the character of my beloved; indeed, when you are far away, Janet, I’ll try to forget it: I shall notice only its wisdom; which is such that I have made it my law of action.
“And far better that crows and ravens—if any ravens there be in these regions—should pick my flesh from my bones, than that they should be prisoned in a workhouse coffin and moulder in a pauper’s grave.”

To the hill, then, I turned.
The ordinary sitting-room and bedrooms I left much as they were: for I knew Diana and Mary would derive more pleasure from seeing again the old homely tables, and chairs, and beds, than from the spectacle of the smartest innovations.
I thought Diana very provoking, and felt uncomfortably confused; and while I was thus thinking and feeling, St. John bent his head; his Greek face was brought to a level with mine, his eyes questioned my eyes piercingly—he kissed me.
I have passed it really in my walks, twice or thrice; it lies in a hollow, between two hills: an elevated hollow, near a swamp, whose peaty moisture is said to answer all the purposes of embalming on the few corpses deposited there.
Mrs. Linton took off the grey cloak of the dairy-maid which we had borrowed for our excursion, shaking her head and expostulating with her, I suppose: she was a young lady, and they made a distinction between her treatment and mine.
Every one was active but Miss Isabella; and they began to remark how sound she slept: her brother, too, asked if she had risen, and seemed impatient for her presence, and hurt that she showed so little anxiety for her sister-in-law.
“That’s for you, nurse,” said he; “you can go down; I’ll give Miss Jane a lecture till you come back.”

Bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to go, because punctuality at meals was rigidly enforced at Gateshead Hall.
I watched it ascending the drive with indifference; carriages often came to Gateshead, but none ever brought visitors in whom I was interested; it stopped in front of the house, the door-bell rang loudly, the new-comer was admitted.
All this being nothing to me, my vacant attention soon found livelier attraction in the spectacle of a little hungry robin, which came and chirruped on the twigs of the leafless cherry-tree nailed against the wall near the casement.
“Did you not know he was called Rochester?”

Of course I did not—I had never heard of him before; but the old lady seemed to regard his existence as a universally understood fact, with which everybody must be acquainted by instinct.
It was exactly one form of Bessie’s Gytrash—a lion-like creature with long hair and a huge head: it passed me, however, quietly enough; not staying to look up, with strange pretercanine eyes, in my face, as I half expected it would.
Now it had been her custom to launch out into fervent admiration of what she called my ‘beauté mâle:’ wherein she differed diametrically from you, who told me point-blank, at the second interview, that you did not think me handsome.
“What!” he exclaimed, “are you quitting me already, and in that way?”

“You said I might go, sir.”

“But not without taking leave; not without a word or two of acknowledgment and good-will: not, in short, in that brief, dry fashion.
I had no sympathy in their appearance, their expression: yet I could imagine that most observers would call them attractive, handsome, imposing; while they would pronounce Mr. Rochester at once harsh-featured and melancholy-looking.
I see her yet in her raging passions, when we had driven her to extremities—spilt our tea, crumbled our bread and butter, tossed our books up to the ceiling, and played a charivari with the ruler and desk, the fender and fire-irons.
I did not now watch the actors; I no longer waited with interest for the curtain to rise; my attention was absorbed by the spectators; my eyes, erewhile fixed on the arch, were now irresistibly attracted to the semicircle of chairs.
let us know the worst at once!”

“But don’t pull me down or strangle me,” he replied: for the Misses Eshton were clinging about him now; and the two dowagers, in vast white wrappers, were bearing down on him like ships in full sail.
On a dark, misty, raw morning in January, I had left a hostile roof with a desperate and embittered heart—a sense of outlawry and almost of reprobation—to seek the chilly harbourage of Lowood: that bourne so far away and unexplored.
For God’s sake, don’t be ironical!”

“I will make the world acknowledge you a beauty, too,” he went on, while I really became uneasy at the strain he had adopted, because I felt he was either deluding himself or trying to delude me.
I remember Adèle clung to me as I left her: I remember I kissed her as I loosened her little hands from my neck; and I cried over her with strange emotion, and quitted her because I feared my sobs would break her still sound repose.
Suddenly he turned away, with an inarticulate exclamation, full of passionate emotion of some kind; he walked fast through the room and came back; he stooped towards me as if to kiss me; but I remembered caresses were now forbidden.
When I think of the thing which flew at my throat this morning, hanging its black and scarlet visage over the nest of my dove, my blood curdles—”

“And what, sir,” I asked, while he paused, “did you do when you had settled her here?
He seemed to devour me with his flaming glance: physically, I felt, at the moment, powerless as stubble exposed to the draught and glow of a furnace: mentally, I still possessed my soul, and with it the certainty of ultimate safety.
I am not absolutely such a fool and sensualist as to regret the absence of a carpet, a sofa, and silver plate; besides, five weeks ago I had nothing—I was an outcast, a beggar, a vagrant; now I have acquaintance, a home, a business.
We had heard no step on that grass-grown track; the water running in the vale was the one lulling sound of the hour and scene; we might well then start when a gay voice, sweet as a silver bell, exclaimed—

“Good evening, Mr. Rivers.
I wish he loved you—does he, Jane?”

I put her cool hand to my hot forehead; “No, Die, not one whit.”

“Then why does he follow you so with his eyes, and get you so frequently alone with him, and keep you so continually at his side?
You shall pay me for the plague of having you eternally in my sight—do you hear, damnable jade?”

“I’ll put my trash away, because you can make me if I refuse,” answered the young lady, closing her book, and throwing it on a chair.
You might be dumb, or a baby, for anything you say to amuse me, or for anything you do, either!”

“You never told me before that I talked too little, or that you disliked my company, Cathy!” exclaimed Heathcliff, in much agitation.
What would Mr. Linton say if he heard you?”

“Excuse me!” answered a familiar voice; “but I know Edgar is in bed, and I cannot stop myself.”

With that the speaker came forward to the fire, panting and holding her hand to her side.
I shed tears, Master Heathcliff, you see—an elderly woman, and a servant merely—and you, after pretending such affection, and having reason to worship her almost, store every tear you have for yourself, and lie there quite at ease.
My young lady asked some aid of her when she first came; but Mr. Heathcliff told her to follow her own business, and let his daughter-in-law look after herself; and Zillah willingly acquiesced, being a narrow-minded, selfish woman.
Then he drew his hand over his eyes, stood a moment to collect himself apparently, and turning anew to Catherine, said, with assumed calmness—“You must learn to avoid putting me in a passion, or I shall really murder you some time!
My head still ached and bled with the blow and fall I had received: no one had reproved John for wantonly striking me; and because I had turned against him to avert farther irrational violence, I was loaded with general opprobrium.
I saw a universal manifestation of discontent when the fumes of the repast met the nostrils of those destined to swallow it; from the van of the procession, the tall girls of the first class, rose the whispered words—

“Disgusting!
Yet at that moment Helen Burns wore on her arm “the untidy badge;” scarcely an hour ago I had heard her condemned by Miss Scatcherd to a dinner of bread and water on the morrow because she had blotted an exercise in copying it out.
Here, come in, bonny wanderer!”

He said this as if he spoke to a vision, viewless to any eye but his own; then, folding his arms, which he had half extended, on his chest, he seemed to enclose in their embrace the invisible being.
Had Grace been young and handsome, I should have been tempted to think that tenderer feelings than prudence or fear influenced Mr. Rochester in her behalf; but, hard-favoured and matronly as she was, the idea could not be admitted.
One unexpected sentence came from her lips after another, till I got involved in a web of mystification; and wondered what unseen spirit had been sitting for weeks by my heart watching its workings and taking record of every pulse.
Self-abandoned, relaxed, and effortless, I seemed to have laid me down in the dried-up bed of a great river; I heard a flood loosened in remote mountains, and felt the torrent come: to rise I had no will, to flee I had no strength.
It rains fast, Hannah: will you have the goodness to look at the fire in the parlour?”

The woman rose: she opened a door, through which I dimly saw a passage: soon I heard her stir a fire in an inner room; she presently came back.
He still slowly moved his finger over his upper lip, and still his eye dwelt dreamily on the glowing grate; thinking it urgent to say something, I asked him presently if he felt any cold draught from the door, which was behind him.
What his subsequent conduct and proposals were is a matter of pure conjecture; but when an event transpired which rendered inquiry after the governess necessary, it was discovered she was gone—no one could tell when, where, or how.
Hannah had told me in the morning there was a letter for me, and when I went down to take it, almost certain that the long-looked for tidings were vouchsafed me at last, I found only an unimportant note from Mr. Briggs on business.
He was taken out from under the ruins, alive, but sadly hurt: a beam had fallen in such a way as to protect him partly; but one eye was knocked out, and one hand so crushed that Mr. Carter, the surgeon, had to amputate it directly.
I doubt thy mother and I must rue that we ever reared thee!” That made her cry, at first; and then being repulsed continually hardened her, and she laughed if I told her to say she was sorry for her faults, and beg to be forgiven.
Linton, recalling old times, would have me give you a cordial reception; and, of course, I am gratified when anything occurs to please her.”

“And I also,” answered Heathcliff, “especially if it be anything in which I have a part.
I sat and thought a doleful time: the clock struck eight, and nine, and still my companion paced to and fro, his head bent on his breast, and perfectly silent, unless a groan or a bitter ejaculation forced itself out at intervals.
Meantime, our young companion, who sat too removed from us to hear what was said, began to evince symptoms of uneasiness, probably repenting that he had denied himself the treat of Catherine’s society for fear of a little fatigue.
You can bear plenty; you’re no weakling: you shall have a daily taste, if I catch such a devil of a temper in your eyes again!”

Cathy ran to me instead of Linton, and knelt down and put her burning cheek on my lap, weeping aloud.
He pressed its hand, and kissed the sarcastic, savage face that every one else shrank from contemplating; and bemoaned him with that strong grief which springs naturally from a generous heart, though it be tough as tempered steel.
NOTE TO THE THIRD EDITION
I avail myself of the opportunity which a third edition of “Jane Eyre” affords me, of again addressing a word to the Public, to explain that my claim to the title of novelist rests on this one work alone.
John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four years older than I, for I was but ten: large and stout for his age, with a dingy and unwholesome skin; thick lineaments in a spacious visage, heavy limbs and large extremities.
I felt physically weak and broken down: but my worse ailment was an unutterable wretchedness of mind: a wretchedness which kept drawing from me silent tears; no sooner had I wiped one salt drop from my cheek than another followed.
Not a tear rose to Burns’ eye; and, while I paused from my sewing, because my fingers quivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of unavailing and impotent anger, not a feature of her pensive face altered its ordinary expression.
All along I had been dreading the fulfilment of this promise,—I had been looking out daily for the “Coming Man,” whose information respecting my past life and conversation was to brand me as a bad child for ever: now there he was.
Hitherto, while gathering up the discourse of Mr. Brocklehurst and Miss Temple, I had not, at the same time, neglected precautions to secure my personal safety; which I thought would be effected, if I could only elude observation.
The door nearest me opened, and a servant came out,—a woman of between thirty and forty; a set, square-made figure, red-haired, and with a hard, plain face: any apparition less romantic or less ghostly could scarcely be conceived.
Rochester would be glad if you and your pupil would take tea with him in the drawing-room this evening,” said she: “he has been so much engaged all day that he could not ask to see you before.”

“When is his tea-time?” I inquired.
All at once I remembered that it might be Pilot, who, when the kitchen-door chanced to be left open, not unfrequently found his way up to the threshold of Mr. Rochester’s chamber: I had seen him lying there myself in the mornings.
What is the matter?”

“Nothing at all, sir.”

“Did you take any cold that night you half drowned me?”

“Not the least.”

“Return to the drawing-room: you are deserting too early.”

“I am tired, sir.”

He looked at me for a minute.
I saw he was going to marry her, for family, perhaps political reasons, because her rank and connections suited him; I felt he had not given her his love, and that her qualifications were ill adapted to win from him that treasure.
I saw a room I remembered to have seen before, the day Mrs. Fairfax showed me over the house: it was hung with tapestry; but the tapestry was now looped up in one part, and there was a door apparent, which had then been concealed.
“Pass, Janet,” said he, making room for me to cross the stile: “go up home, and stay your weary little wandering feet at a friend’s threshold.”

All I had now to do was to obey him in silence: no need for me to colloquise further.
Mr. Rochester, this was not Sophie, it was not Leah, it was not Mrs. Fairfax: it was not—no, I was sure of it, and am still—it was not even that strange woman, Grace Poole.”

“It must have been one of them,” interrupted my master.
I was aware her lurid visage flamed over mine, and I lost consciousness: for the second time in my life—only the second time—I became insensible from terror.”

“Who was with you when you revived?”

“No one, sir, but the broad day.
St. John, no doubt, would have given the world to follow, recall, retain her, when she thus left him; but he would not give one chance of heaven, nor relinquish, for the elysium of her love, one hope of the true, eternal Paradise.
The feeling was not like an electric shock, but it was quite as sharp, as strange, as startling: it acted on my senses as if their utmost activity hitherto had been but torpor, from which they were now summoned and forced to wake.
CHAPTER III
While leading the way upstairs, she recommended that I should hide the candle, and not make a noise; for her master had an odd notion about the chamber she would put me in, and never let anybody lodge there willingly.
The intense horror of nightmare came over me: I tried to draw back my arm, but the hand clung to it, and a most melancholy voice sobbed,

“Let me in—let me in!”

“Who are you?” I asked, struggling, meanwhile, to disengage myself.
He cast a sinister look at the little flame which I had enticed to play between the ribs, swept the cat from its elevation, and bestowing himself in the vacancy, commenced the operation of stuffing a three-inch pipe with tobacco.
Promise to hold your tongue, and before that clock strikes—it wants three minutes of one—you’re a free woman!’

“He took the implements which I described to you in my letter from his breast, and would have turned down the candle.
“I saw her at morn,” he replied: “she would have me to cut her a hazel switch, and then she leapt her Galloway over the hedge yonder, where it is lowest, and galloped out of sight.”

You may guess how I felt at hearing this news.
He surveyed the carved front and low-browed lattices, the straggling gooseberry-bushes and crooked firs, with solemn intentness, and then shook his head: his private feelings entirely disapproved of the exterior of his new abode.
“Don’t grovel on the ground there: up, this moment!”

Linton had sunk prostrate again in another paroxysm of helpless fear, caused by his father’s glance towards him, I suppose: there was nothing else to produce such humiliation.
Its owner stood behind; her light, shining ringlets blending, at intervals, with his brown looks, as she bent to superintend his studies; and her face—it was lucky he could not see her face, or he would never have been so steady.
“And tell him, if he’ll take it, I’ll come and teach him to read it right,” she said; “and, if he refuse it, I’ll go upstairs, and never tease him again.”

I carried it, and repeated the message; anxiously watched by my employer.
I sought, and soon discovered, the three headstones on the slope next the moor: the middle one grey, and half buried in the heath; Edgar Linton’s only harmonized by the turf and moss creeping up its foot; Heathcliff’s still bare.
Here I walked about for a long time, feeling very strange, and mortally apprehensive of some one coming in and kidnapping me; for I believed in kidnappers, their exploits having frequently figured in Bessie’s fireside chronicles.
The odour which now filled the refectory was scarcely more appetising than that which had regaled our nostrils at breakfast: the dinner was served in two huge tin-plated vessels, whence rose a strong steam redolent of rancid fat.
There are many others who have no friends, who must look about for themselves and be their own helpers; and what is their resource?”

I could not tell: nothing answered me; I then ordered my brain to find a response, and quickly.
He looked quite a gentleman, and I believe he was your father’s brother.”

“What foreign country was he going to, Bessie?”

“An island thousands of miles off, where they make wine—the butler did tell me—”

“Madeira?” I suggested.
To be sure it is pleasant at any time; for Thornfield is a fine old hall, rather neglected of late years perhaps, but still it is a respectable place; yet you know in winter-time one feels dreary quite alone in the best quarters.
Now shall I dance for you?”

“No, that will do: but after your mama went to the Holy Virgin, as you say, with whom did you live then?”

“With Madame Frédéric and her husband: she took care of me, but she is nothing related to me.
If a breath of air stirred, it made no sound here; for there was not a holly, not an evergreen to rustle, and the stripped hawthorn and hazel bushes were as still as the white, worn stones which causewayed the middle of the path.
Though I had now extinguished my candle and was laid down in bed, I could not sleep for thinking of his look when he paused in the avenue, and told how his destiny had risen up before him, and dared him to be happy at Thornfield.
Besides, she added, a message might possibly come from Mr. Rochester when she was undressed; “et alors quel dommage!”

I told her stories as long as she would listen to them; and then for a change I took her out into the gallery.
I was not sure of the existence of one virtue in her nature: I had marked neither modesty, nor benevolence, nor candour, nor refinement in her mind or manners—and, I married her:—gross, grovelling, mole-eyed blockhead that I was!
But before I go on, tell me what you mean by your ‘Well, sir?’ It is a small phrase very frequent with you; and which many a time has drawn me on and on through interminable talk: I don’t very well know why.”

“I mean,—What next?
Marsh End had belonged to the Rivers ever since it was a house: and it was, she affirmed, “aboon two hundred year old—for all it looked but a small, humble place, naught to compare wi’ Mr. Oliver’s grand hall down i’ Morton Vale.
I am obscure: Rivers is an old name; but of the three sole descendants of the race, two earn the dependent’s crust among strangers, and the third considers himself an alien from his native country—not only for life, but in death.
God had an errand for me; to bear which afar, to deliver it well, skill and strength, courage and eloquence, the best qualifications of soldier, statesman, and orator, were all needed: for these all centre in the good missionary.
Yet that she should be found is become a matter of serious urgency: advertisements have been put in all the papers; I myself have received a letter from one Mr. Briggs, a solicitor, communicating the details I have just imparted.
I softened considerably what related to the three days of wandering and starvation, because to have told him all would have been to inflict unnecessary pain: the little I did say lacerated his faithful heart deeper than I wished.
He had grown sparer, and lost his colour, and spoke and dressed quite differently; and, on the very day of his return, he told Joseph and me we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the back-kitchen, and leave the house for him.
He seized a tureen of hot apple sauce (the first thing that came under his grip) and dashed it full against the speaker’s face and neck; who instantly commenced a lament that brought Isabella and Catherine hurrying to the place.
Hasn’t he been intimate with Mr. Heathcliff lately?”

“Heathcliff frequently visits at the Grange,” answered I, “though more on the strength of the mistress having known him when a boy, than because the master likes his company.
If once I find it open he’s done for; I do it invariably, even though the minute before I have been recalling a hundred reasons that should make me refrain: it is some devil that urges me to thwart my own schemes by killing him.
When I first looked into his face, I perceived that he had got intelligence of the catastrophe; and a foolish notion struck me that his heart was quelled and he prayed, because his lips moved and his gaze was bent on the ground.
When I chanced to encounter the housekeeper of Wuthering Heights, in paying business visits to Gimmerton, I used to ask how the young master got on; for he lived almost as secluded as Catherine herself, and was never to be seen.
I’ll look to the rest.”

He spoke these words, holding the door open for his son to pass, and the latter achieved his exit exactly as a spaniel might which suspected the person who attended on it of designing a spiteful squeeze.
Shame at her scorn, and hope of her approval, were his first prompters to higher pursuits; and instead of guarding him from one and winning him to the other, his endeavours to raise himself had produced just the contrary result.
I should think there were fifty ladies and gentlemen present—all of the first county families; and Miss Ingram was considered the belle of the evening.”

“You saw her, you say, Mrs. Fairfax: what was she like?”

“Yes, I saw her.
I now inform you that she is my wife, whom I married fifteen years ago,—Bertha Mason by name; sister of this resolute personage, who is now, with his quivering limbs and white cheeks, showing you what a stout heart men may bear.
The population here must be thin, and I see no passengers on these roads: they stretch out east, west, north, and south—white, broad, lonely; they are all cut in the moor, and the heather grows deep and wild to their very verge.
One, to be sure, had hair a shade darker than the other, and there was a difference in their style of wearing it; Mary’s pale brown locks were parted and braided smooth: Diana’s duskier tresses covered her neck with thick curls.
Having brought my eventide musings to this point, I rose, went to my door, and looked at the sunset of the harvest-day, and at the quiet fields before my cottage, which, with the school, was distant half a mile from the village.
And then there are other chances in life far more thrilling and rapture-giving: this is solid, an affair of the actual world, nothing ideal about it: all its associations are solid and sober, and its manifestations are the same.
at hearing one has got a fortune; one begins to consider responsibilities, and to ponder business; on a base of steady satisfaction rise certain grave cares, and we contain ourselves, and brood over our bliss with a solemn brow.
“I could decide if I were but certain,” I answered: “were I but convinced that it is God’s will I should marry you, I could vow to marry you here and now—come afterwards what would!”

“My prayers are heard!” ejaculated St. John.
“When you go in,” said I, “tell your master that a person wishes to speak to him, but do not give my name.”

“I don’t think he will see you,” she answered; “he refuses everybody.”

When she returned, I inquired what he had said.
My very soul demands you: it will be satisfied, or it will take deadly vengeance on its frame.”

“Well, sir, I will stay with you: I have said so.”

“Yes—but you understand one thing by staying with me; and I understand another.
In the absence of clear proofs of his condition, I deemed it best to abstain from noticing his curious conduct; and, five minutes afterwards, the entrance of Heathcliff relieved me, in some measure, from my uncomfortable state.
Still it became in a manner necessary; twice, or thrice, Hindley’s manifestation of scorn, while his father was near, roused the old man to a fury: he seized his stick to strike him, and shook with rage that he could not do it.
He concealed it from her; but if ever he heard me answer sharply, or saw any other servant grow cloudy at some imperious order of hers, he would show his trouble by a frown of displeasure that never darkened on his own account.
There it is: not among the Lintons, mind, under the chapel-roof, but in the open air, with a head-stone; and you may please yourself whether you go to them or come to me!”

“Catherine, what have you done?” commenced the master.
To obviate the fatigue of mounting and descending the stairs, we fitted up this, where you lie at present—on the same floor with the parlour; and she was soon strong enough to move from one to the other, leaning on Edgar’s arm.
If yah dunnut loike wer company, there’s maister’s; un’ if yah dunnut loike maister, there’s us.”

“Then I shall go upstairs,” I answered; “show me a chamber.”

I put my basin on a tray, and went myself to fetch some more milk.
I couldn’t bear to witness her sorrow: to see her pale, dejected countenance, and heavy eyes: and I yielded, in the faint hope that Linton himself might prove, by his reception of us, how little of the tale was founded on fact.
He said, in summer, perhaps, they might meet: meantime, he wished him to continue writing at intervals, and engaged to give him what advice and comfort he was able by letter; being well aware of his hard position in his family.
I shrieked out—that frightens her—she heard papa coming, and she broke the hinges and divided the case, and gave me her mother’s portrait; the other she attempted to hide: but papa asked what was the matter, and I explained it.
Kissing her cheek, he murmured,—“I am going to her; and you, darling child, shall come to us!” and never stirred or spoke again; but continued that rapt, radiant gaze, till his pulse imperceptibly stopped and his soul departed.
“But if you be coming to plead off paying for a place you won’t occupy, your journey is useless: I never relent in exacting my due from any one.”

“I’m coming to plead off nothing about it,” I exclaimed, considerably irritated.
I cannot tell what sentiment haunted the quite solitary churchyard, with its inscribed headstone; its gate, its two trees, its low horizon, girdled by a broken wall, and its newly-risen crescent, attesting the hour of eventide.
In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of the fourth class, and regular tasks and occupations were assigned me: hitherto, I had only been a spectator of the proceedings at Lowood; I was now to become an actor therein.
Some heavy clouds, swept from the sky by a rising wind, had left the moon bare; and her light, streaming in through a window near, shone full both on us and on the approaching figure, which we at once recognised as Miss Temple.
A curious friendship theirs must have been: a pointed illustration, indeed, of the old adage that “extremes meet.”

Two or three of the gentlemen sat near him, and I caught at times scraps of their conversation across the room.
I soon rose, quietly took off my bonnet and gloves, uninvited, and said I would just step out to Bessie—who was, I dared say, in the kitchen—and ask her to ascertain whether Mrs. Reed was disposed to receive me or not to-night.
I thank Providence, who watched over you, that she then spent her fury on your wedding apparel, which perhaps brought back vague reminiscences of her own bridal days: but on what might have happened, I cannot endure to reflect.
I had, by cross-ways and by-paths, once more drawn near the tract of moorland; and now, only a few fields, almost as wild and unproductive as the heath from which they were scarcely reclaimed, lay between me and the dusky hill.
Zealous in his ministerial labours, blameless in his life and habits, he yet did not appear to enjoy that mental serenity, that inward content, which should be the reward of every sincere Christian and practical philanthropist.
“He is not stern and distant to his friends; and if he could speak, he would not be silent.”

As she patted the dog’s head, bending with native grace before his young and austere master, I saw a glow rise to that master’s face.
“While something in me,” he went on, “is acutely sensible to her charms, something else is as deeply impressed with her defects: they are such that she could sympathise in nothing I aspired to—co-operate in nothing I undertook.
“I would rather not just now.”

“You shall!—you must!”

“I would rather Diana or Mary informed you.”

Of course these objections wrought my eagerness to a climax: gratified it must be, and that without delay; and I told him so.
“I repeat I freely consent to go with you as your fellow-missionary, but not as your wife; I cannot marry you and become part of you.”

“A part of me you must become,” he answered steadily; “otherwise the whole bargain is void.
But,” was slowly, distinctly read, “the fearful, the unbelieving, &c., shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.”

Henceforward, I knew what fate St. John feared for me.
Some of your accomplishments are not ordinary.”

“I don’t know about that.”

“You had a little cottage near the school, you say: did he ever come there to see you?”

“Now and then?”

“Of an evening?”

“Once or twice.”

A pause.
He had been standing a long time in that position, for I saw a pair of ousels passing and repassing scarcely three feet from him, busy in building their nest, and regarding his proximity no more than that of a piece of timber.
But I’ve been as happy musing by myself among those stones, under that old church: lying, through the long June evenings, on the green mound of her mother’s grave, and wishing—yearning for the time when I might lie beneath it.
Had I been born where laws are less strict and tastes less dainty, I should treat myself to a slow vivisection of those two, as an evening’s amusement.”

He drew in his breath, struck the table, and swore to himself, “By hell!
I fancied that as they consumed, he recalled the pleasure they had already imparted, and the triumph and ever-increasing pleasure he had anticipated from them; and I fancied I guessed the incitement to his secret studies also.
His wit is bright, his humour attractive, but both bear the same relation to his serious genius that the mere lambent sheet-lightning playing under the edge of the summer-cloud does to the electric death-spark hid in its womb.
It must have been most irksome to find herself bound by a hard-wrung pledge to stand in the stead of a parent to a strange child she could not love, and to see an uncongenial alien permanently intruded on her own family group.
Miss Temple, having assembled the whole school, announced that inquiry had been made into the charges alleged against Jane Eyre, and that she was most happy to be able to pronounce her completely cleared from every imputation.
But I, and the rest who continued well, enjoyed fully the beauties of the scene and season; they let us ramble in the wood, like gipsies, from morning till night; we did what we liked, went where we liked: we lived better too.
I recalled the time when I had travelled that very road in a coach; I remembered descending that hill at twilight; an age seemed to have elapsed since the day which brought me first to Lowood, and I had never quitted it since.
I looked at my pupil, who did not at first appear to notice me: she was quite a child, perhaps seven or eight years old, slightly built, with a pale, small-featured face, and a redundancy of hair falling in curls to her waist.
If, on reflection, I find I have fallen into no great absurdity, I shall try to forgive you; but it was not right.”

“Oh, you have been very correct—very careful, very sensible.”

I reflected, and thought, on the whole, I had.
As I crossed his shadow, thrown long over the garden by the moon, not yet risen high, he said quietly, without turning—

“Jane, come and look at this fellow.”

I had made no noise: he had not eyes behind—could his shadow feel?
It has seemed to me more than once when I have been in a doze, that my dear husband, who died fifteen years since, has come in and sat down beside me; and that I have even heard him call me by my name, Alice, as he used to do.
We mounted the first staircase, passed up the gallery, proceeded to the third storey: the low, black door, opened by Mr. Rochester’s master-key, admitted us to the tapestried room, with its great bed and its pictorial cabinet.
But that is not your pity, Jane; it is not the feeling of which your whole face is full at this moment—with which your eyes are now almost overflowing—with which your heart is heaving—with which your hand is trembling in mine.
But my night was wretched, my rest broken: the ground was damp, the air cold: besides, intruders passed near me more than once, and I had again and again to change my quarters: no sense of safety or tranquillity befriended me.
What is your reason for saying so?”

“I read it in your eye; it is not of that description which promises the maintenance of an even tenor in life.”

“I am not ambitious.”

He started at the word “ambitious.” He repeated, “No.
You would think him gentle, yet in some things he is inexorable as death; and the worst of it is, my conscience will hardly permit me to dissuade him from his severe decision: certainly, I cannot for a moment blame him for it.
But I want a wife.”

“Do you, sir?”

“Yes: is it news to you?”

“Of course: you said nothing about it before.”

“Is it unwelcome news?”

“That depends on circumstances, sir—on your choice.”

“Which you shall make for me, Jane.
He ran to the window and I to the door, just in time to behold the two Lintons descend from the family carriage, smothered in cloaks and furs, and the Earnshaws dismount from their horses: they often rode to church in winter.
A person who has not done one-half his day’s work by ten o’clock, runs a chance of leaving the other half undone.”

“Nevertheless, Mrs. Dean, resume your chair; because to-morrow I intend lengthening the night till afternoon.
Are you feeling better this morning?”

“Much.”

“That’s good news.”

* * * * *

I got Miss Catherine and myself to Thrushcross Grange; and, to my agreeable disappointment, she behaved infinitely better than I dared to expect.
There’s my picture: and I’m his friend—so much so, that had he thought seriously to catch you, I should, perhaps, have held my tongue, and let you fall into his trap.”

Miss Linton regarded her sister-in-law with indignation.
That was worse: she fretted and sighed, and looked at her watch till eight, and finally went to her room, completely overdone with sleep; judging by her peevish, heavy look, and the constant rubbing she inflicted on her eyes.
That night, though, he easily recovered his good humour: he was charmed with two or three pretty songs—your songs, Ellen; and when I was obliged to go, he begged and entreated me to come the following evening; and I promised.
“And now, kiss me, for minding so well.”

“No, read it over first correctly, without a single mistake.”

The male speaker began to read: he was a young man, respectably dressed and seated at a table, having a book before him.
“Nay, you’ll be ashamed of me every day of your life,” he answered; “and the more ashamed, the more you know me; and I cannot bide it.”

“So you won’t be my friend?” she said, smiling as sweet as honey, and creeping close up.
And it is like bending back a stiff spring: it is by compulsion that I do the slightest act not prompted by one thought; and by compulsion that I notice anything alive or dead, which is not associated with one universal idea.
I shall remember how you thrust me back—roughly and violently thrust me back—into the red-room, and locked me up there, to my dying day; though I was in agony; though I cried out, while suffocating with distress, ‘Have mercy!
It is as natural as that I should love those who show me affection, or submit to punishment when I feel it is deserved.”

“Heathens and savage tribes hold that doctrine, but Christians and civilised nations disown it.”

“How?
“A careless girl!” said Mr. Brocklehurst, and immediately after—“It is the new pupil, I perceive.” And before I could draw breath, “I must not forget I have a word to say respecting her.” Then aloud: how loud it seemed to me!
I was not free to resume the interrupted chain of my reflections till bedtime: even then a teacher who occupied the same room with me kept me from the subject to which I longed to recur, by a prolonged effusion of small talk.
The dim forehead was crowned with a star; the lineaments below were seen as through the suffusion of vapour; the eyes shone dark and wild; the hair streamed shadowy, like a beamless cloud torn by storm or by electric travail.
I was tormented by the contrast between my idea and my handiwork: in each case I had imagined something which I was quite powerless to realise.”

“Not quite: you have secured the shadow of your thought; but no more, probably.
“I am disposed to be gregarious and communicative to-night,” he repeated, “and that is why I sent for you: the fire and the chandelier were not sufficient company for me; nor would Pilot have been, for none of these can talk.
At the end of a few minutes he inquired in rather a peculiar tone—

“I forget whether you said you saw anything when you opened your chamber door.”

“No, sir, only the candlestick on the ground.”

“But you heard an odd laugh?
he has a fine bass voice, and an excellent taste for music.”

“And Miss Ingram: what sort of a voice had she?”

“A very rich and powerful one: she sang delightfully; it was a treat to listen to her;—and she played afterwards.
I thank Heaven I have now done with them!”

Mrs. Dent here bent over to the pious lady and whispered something in her ear; I suppose, from the answer elicited, it was a reminder that one of the anathematised race was present.
Mrs. Fairfax had said Mr. Rochester possessed a fine voice: he did—a mellow, powerful bass, into which he threw his own feeling, his own force; finding a way through the ear to the heart, and there waking sensation strangely.
“I don’t care about it, mother; you may please yourself: but I ought to warn you, I have no faith.”

“It’s like your impudence to say so: I expected it of you; I heard it in your step as you crossed the threshold.”

“Did you?
Bitter and base associations have become the sole food of your memory: you wander here and there, seeking rest in exile: happiness in pleasure—I mean in heartless, sensual pleasure—such as dulls intellect and blights feeling.
Such a burden to be left on my hands—and so much annoyance as she caused me, daily and hourly, with her incomprehensible disposition, and her sudden starts of temper, and her continual, unnatural watchings of one’s movements!
I, at least, had nothing more to do: there were my trunks, packed, locked, corded, ranged in a row along the wall of my little chamber; to-morrow, at this time, they would be far on their road to London: and so should I (D.V.
Signed, Richard Mason.’”

“That—if a genuine document—may prove I have been married, but it does not prove that the woman mentioned therein as my wife is still living.”

“She was living three months ago,” returned the lawyer.
My fixed desire was to seek and find a good and intelligent woman, whom I could love: a contrast to the fury I left at Thornfield—”

“But you could not marry, sir.”

“I had determined and was convinced that I could and ought.
“What account can you give of yourself?”

Somehow, now that I had once crossed the threshold of this house, and once was brought face to face with its owners, I felt no longer outcast, vagrant, and disowned by the wide world.
Many showed themselves obliging, and amiable too; and I discovered amongst them not a few examples of natural politeness, and innate self-respect, as well as of excellent capacity, that won both my goodwill and my admiration.
I have brought you a book for evening solace,” and he laid on the table a new publication—a poem: one of those genuine productions so often vouchsafed to the fortunate public of those days—the golden age of modern literature.
You, Diana, and Mary are his sister’s children, as I am his brother’s child?”

“Undeniably.”

“You three, then, are my cousins; half our blood on each side flows from the same source?”

“We are cousins; yes.”

I surveyed him.
It seemed I had found a brother: one I could be proud of,—one I could love; and two sisters, whose qualities were such, that, when I knew them but as mere strangers, they had inspired me with genuine affection and admiration.
He guesses we shouldn’t wait for him till this late hour: at least, he guesses that only Mr. Hindley would be up; and he’d rather avoid having the door opened by the master.”

“Nay, nay, he’s noan at Gimmerton,” said Joseph.
or I pay another visit, whether Linton be in or not.”

He sent a rapid glance through the half-open door of the chamber, and, ascertaining that what I stated was apparently true, delivered the house of his luckless presence.
Nothing hindered me from eating heartily, and I experienced a certain sense of satisfaction and superiority, as, at intervals, I cast a look towards my silent companions, and felt the comfort of a quiet conscience within me.
“Well,” said the scoundrel, “we’ll not argue the subject now: but I have a fancy to try my hand at rearing a young one; so intimate to your master that I must supply the place of this with my own, if he attempt to remove it.
Next morning I answered the letter by a slip of paper, inscribed, “Master Heathcliff is requested to send no more notes to Miss Linton, as she will not receive them.” And, henceforth, the little boy came with vacant pockets.
Mr. Heathcliff did not explain his reasons for taking a new mind about my coming here; he only told me he wanted me, and he was tired of seeing Catherine: I must make the little parlour my sitting-room, and keep her with me.
The only marked event of the afternoon was, that I saw the girl with whom I had conversed in the verandah dismissed in disgrace by Miss Scatcherd from a history class, and sent to stand in the middle of the large schoolroom.
Not that my fancy was much captivated by the idea of long chimneys and clouds of smoke—“but,” I argued, “Thornfield will, probably, be a good way from the town.”

Here the socket of the candle dropped, and the wick went out.
Descending from her chair, she came and placed herself on my knee; then, folding her little hands demurely before her, shaking back her curls and lifting her eyes to the ceiling, she commenced singing a song from some opera.
I was about to address her, for I wished to know what account had been given of the affair: but, on advancing, I saw a second person in the chamber—a woman sitting on a chair by the bedside, and sewing rings to new curtains.
Sometimes all, as with one consent, suspended their by-play to observe and listen to the principal actors: for, after all, Mr. Rochester and—because closely connected with him—Miss Ingram were the life and soul of the party.
Presently the words Jamaica, Kingston, Spanish Town, indicated the West Indies as his residence; and it was with no little surprise I gathered, ere long, that he had there first seen and become acquainted with Mr. Rochester.
“You have—have you?” thought I; “there is diablerie in the business after all, then!”

“Don’t be alarmed,” continued the strange being; “she’s a safe hand is Mrs. Poole: close and quiet; any one may repose confidence in her.
To attain this end, are you justified in overleaping an obstacle of custom—a mere conventional impediment which neither your conscience sanctifies nor your judgment approves?”

He paused for an answer: and what was I to say?
Yes—just one of your tricks: not to send for a carriage, and come clattering over street and road like a common mortal, but to steal into the vicinage of your home along with twilight, just as if you were a dream or a shade.
Once she said she had actually put the question to Mr. Rochester as to when he was going to bring his bride home; but he had answered her only by a joke and one of his queer looks, and she could not tell what to make of him.
This little sunny-faced girl with the dimpled cheek and rosy lips; the satin-smooth hazel hair, and the radiant hazel eyes?” (I had green eyes, reader; but you must excuse the mistake: for him they were new-dyed, I suppose.)
I passed it as negligently as I did the pollard willow opposite to it: I had no presentiment of what it would be to me; no inward warning that the arbitress of my life—my genius for good or evil—waited there in humble guise.
“Think of his misery; think of his danger—look at his state when left alone; remember his headlong nature; consider the recklessness following on despair—soothe him; save him; love him; tell him you love him and will be his.
All the valley at my right hand was full of pasture-fields, and cornfields, and wood; and a glittering stream ran zig-zag through the varied shades of green, the mellowing grain, the sombre woodland, the clear and sunny lea.
“Well!” I exclaimed, using an expression of the district, “that caps the globe, however!”

I, in my turn, scrutinised the paper; but saw nothing on it save a few dingy stains of paint where I had tried the tint in my pencil.
I felt how—if I were his wife, this good man, pure as the deep sunless source, could soon kill me, without drawing from my veins a single drop of blood, or receiving on his own crystal conscience the faintest stain of crime.
I, on the contrary, became more cheerful, and took fresh courage: these last words gave me an insight as to where the difficulty lay; and as it was no difficulty with me, I felt quite relieved from my previous embarrassment.
The curtains were still looped up at one corner, and I resumed my station as spy; because, if Catherine had wished to return, I intended shattering their great glass panes to a million of fragments, unless they let her out.
But if you will not mock at me, I’ll explain it: I can’t do it distinctly; but I’ll give you a feeling of how I feel.”

She seated herself by me again: her countenance grew sadder and graver, and her clasped hands trembled.
Heathcliff will have a long walk, wherever he may lodge to-night; and I’m thirsty.”

She took her post before the urn; and Miss Isabella came, summoned by the bell; then, having handed their chairs forward, I left the room.
The minute after a step traversed the hall; the open house was too tempting for Heathcliff to resist walking in: most likely he supposed that I was inclined to shirk my promise, and so resolved to trust to his own audacity.
On the morrow one could hardly imagine that there had been three weeks of summer: the primroses and crocuses were hidden under wintry drifts; the larks were silent, the young leaves of the early trees smitten and blackened.
On one side of the road rose a high, rough bank, where hazels and stunted oaks, with their roots half exposed, held uncertain tenure: the soil was too loose for the latter; and strong winds had blown some nearly horizontal.
At first, I expected there would be sad work persuading you to let me keep my word to Linton: for I had engaged to call again next day, when we quitted him; but, as you stayed upstairs on the morrow, I escaped that trouble.
I was sure you wouldn’t break your word, and I’ll make you promise again, before you go.’

“I knew now that I mustn’t tease him, as he was ill; and I spoke softly and put no questions, and avoided irritating him in any way.
I thought he intended to cut a caper round the bed; but suddenly composing himself, he fell on his knees, and raised his hands, and returned thanks that the lawful master and the ancient stock were restored to their rights.
I returned to my book—Bewick’s History of British Birds: the letterpress thereof I cared little for, generally speaking; and yet there were certain introductory pages that, child as I was, I could not pass quite as a blank.
I heard her say—

“Sarah, come and sleep with me in the nursery; I daren’t for my life be alone with that poor child to-night: she might die; it’s such a strange thing she should have that fit: I wonder if she saw anything.
The remains of my breakfast of bread and milk stood on the table, and having crumbled a morsel of roll, I was tugging at the sash to put out the crumbs on the window-sill, when Bessie came running upstairs into the nursery.
The eighty, I know, despise me.”

“Jane, you are mistaken: probably not one in the school either despises or dislikes you: many, I am sure, pity you much.”

“How can they pity me after what Mr. Brocklehurst has said?”

“Mr.
Our progress was leisurely, and gave me ample time to reflect; I was content to be at length so near the end of my journey; and as I leaned back in the comfortable though not elegant conveyance, I meditated much at my ease.
“I suppose,” thought I, “judging from the plainness of the servant and carriage, Mrs. Fairfax is not a very dashing person: so much the better; I never lived amongst fine people but once, and I was very miserable with them.
Is he liked for himself?”

“I have no cause to do otherwise than like him; and I believe he is considered a just and liberal landlord by his tenants: but he has never lived much amongst them.”

“But has he no peculiarities?
The new face, too, was like a new picture introduced to the gallery of memory; and it was dissimilar to all the others hanging there: firstly, because it was masculine; and, secondly, because it was dark, strong, and stern.
His shape, now divested of cloak, I perceived harmonised in squareness with his physiognomy: I suppose it was a good figure in the athletic sense of the term—broad chested and thin flanked, though neither tall nor graceful.
The fact is, once for all, I don’t wish to treat you like an inferior: that is” (correcting himself), “I claim only such superiority as must result from twenty years’ difference in age and a century’s advance in experience.
You are silly, because, suffer as you may, you will not beckon it to approach, nor will you stir one step to meet it where it waits you.”

She again put her short black pipe to her lips, and renewed her smoking with vigour.
There was the great four-post bed with amber hangings as of old; there the toilet-table, the armchair, and the footstool, at which I had a hundred times been sentenced to kneel, to ask pardon for offences by me uncommitted.
Everybody knew your errand.”

“You must see the carriage, Jane, and tell me if you don’t think it will suit Mrs. Rochester exactly; and whether she won’t look like Queen Boadicea, leaning back against those purple cushions.
“It would, indeed, be a relief,” I thought, “if I had ever so small an independency; I never can bear being dressed like a doll by Mr. Rochester, or sitting like a second Danae with the golden shower falling daily round me.
I thought of the life that lay before me—your life, sir—an existence more expansive and stirring than my own: as much more so as the depths of the sea to which the brook runs are than the shallows of its own strait channel.
He seemed to use them rather as instruments to search other people’s thoughts, than as agents to reveal his own: the which combination of keenness and reserve was considerably more calculated to embarrass than to encourage.
He gave each one quiet kiss, said in a low tone a few words of welcome, stood a while to be talked to, and then, intimating that he supposed they would soon rejoin him in the parlour, withdrew there as to a place of refuge.
St. John did not rebuke our vivacity; but he escaped from it: he was seldom in the house; his parish was large, the population scattered, and he found daily business in visiting the sick and poor in its different districts.
He hailed me to follow him, and, after marching through a wash-house, and a paved area containing a coal-shed, pump, and pigeon-cot, we at length arrived in the huge, warm, cheerful apartment where I was formerly received.
Having approached this structure, I looked inside, and perceived it to be a singular sort of old-fashioned couch, very conveniently designed to obviate the necessity for every member of the family having a room to himself.
Wish and learn to smooth away the surly wrinkles, to raise your lids frankly, and change the fiends to confident, innocent angels, suspecting and doubting nothing, and always seeing friends where they are not sure of foes.
It’s empty; ye may hev’ it all to yerseln, un’ Him as allus maks a third, i’ sich ill company!”

Gladly did I take advantage of this intimation; and the minute I flung myself into a chair, by the fire, I nodded, and slept.
She was conscious of his aim, and in her better moods endured his efforts placidly, only showing their uselessness by now and then suppressing a wearied sigh, and checking him at last with the saddest of smiles and kisses.
She seemed pleased at this arrangement; and, by degrees, I smuggled over a great number of books, and other articles, that had formed her amusement at the Grange; and flattered myself we should get on in tolerable comfort.
“What?” said Mrs. Reed under her breath: her usually cold composed grey eye became troubled with a look like fear; she took her hand from my arm, and gazed at me as if she really did not know whether I were child or fiend.
“Miss Temple is full of goodness; it pains her to be severe to any one, even the worst in the school: she sees my errors, and tells me of them gently; and, if I do anything worthy of praise, she gives me my meed liberally.
We were now, as far as I could see, on a sort of common; but there were houses scattered all over the district; I felt we were in a different region to Lowood, more populous, less picturesque; more stirring, less romantic.
I grant an ugly woman is a blot on the fair face of creation; but as to the gentlemen, let them be solicitous to possess only strength and valour: let their motto be:—Hunt, shoot, and fight: the rest is not worth a fillip.
The passions may rage furiously, like true heathens, as they are; and the desires may imagine all sorts of vain things: but judgment shall still have the last word in every argument, and the casting vote in every decision.
So I addressed the housekeeper; asked her to show me a room, told her I should probably be a visitor here for a week or two, had my trunk conveyed to my chamber, and followed it thither myself: I met Bessie on the landing.
If I lived with you as you desire, I should then be your mistress: to say otherwise is sophistical—is false.”

“Jane, I am not a gentle-tempered man—you forget that: I am not long-enduring; I am not cool and dispassionate.
But Jane will give me her love: yes—nobly, generously.”

Up the blood rushed to his face; forth flashed the fire from his eyes; erect he sprang; he held his arms out; but I evaded the embrace, and at once quitted the room.
you quite put me out of patience: I am rational enough; it is you who misunderstand, or rather who affect to misunderstand.”

“Perhaps, if you explained yourself a little more fully, I should comprehend better.”

“Explain!
I know my Leader: that He is just as well as mighty; and while He has chosen a feeble instrument to perform a great task, He will, from the boundless stores of His providence, supply the inadequacy of the means to the end.
If I told anything, my tale would be such as must necessarily make a profound impression on the mind of my hearer: and that mind, yet from its sufferings too prone to gloom, needed not the deeper shade of the supernatural.
“I must stop it, nevertheless!” I muttered, knocking my knuckles through the glass, and stretching an arm out to seize the importunate branch; instead of which, my fingers closed on the fingers of a little, ice-cold hand!
At last, he said, in a half-whisper, plainly not expecting an answer,

“Is any one here?”

I considered it best to confess my presence; for I knew Heathcliff’s accents, and feared he might search further, if I kept quiet.
Mrs. Earnshaw expected him by supper-time on the third evening, and she put the meal off hour after hour; there were no signs of his coming, however, and at last the children got tired of running down to the gate to look.
Dame Archer brought the cherub down to master, in the house, and his face just began to light up, when the old croaker steps forward, and says he—‘Earnshaw, it’s a blessing your wife has been spared to leave you this son.
And I, in my secret heart (and conscience never reproached me), thought what a blessing it would be for him should Heathcliff put him out of misery; and what a blessing for me should he send Heathcliff to his right abode!
You shall walk with me, Nelly.”

“No, she’s not going to any such place,” I cried, struggling to release my arm, which he had seized: but she was almost at the door-stones already, scampering round the brow at full speed.
Get into bed.”

She threw at me a very naughty look, so naughty that I would not kiss her good-night at first: I covered her up, and shut her door, in great displeasure; but, repenting half-way, I returned softly, and lo!
“The fool stared, with a grin hovering about his lips, and a scowl gathering over his eyes, as if uncertain whether he might not join in my mirth: whether it were not pleasant familiarity, or what it really was, contempt.
And I, through pardonable weakness, refrained from correcting the error; asking myself what good there would be in disturbing his last moments with information that he had neither power nor opportunity to turn to account.
Miss Eyre has been an invaluable companion to me, and a kind and careful teacher to Adèle.”

“Don’t trouble yourself to give her a character,” returned Mr. Rochester: “eulogiums will not bias me; I shall judge for myself.
She is now with Sophie, undergoing a robing process: in a few minutes she will re-enter; and I know what I shall see,—a miniature of Céline Varens, as she used to appear on the boards at the rising of—But never mind that.
I waited till the last deep and full vibration had expired—till the tide of talk, checked an instant, had resumed its flow; I then quitted my sheltered corner and made my exit by the side-door, which was fortunately near.
“I daresay you hardly remember me, Miss,” he said, rising as I entered; “but my name is Leaven: I lived coachman with Mrs. Reed when you were at Gateshead, eight or nine years since, and I live there still.”

“Oh, Robert!
be with him while you may: but a few more days or weeks, at most, and you are parted from him for ever!” And then I strangled a new-born agony—a deformed thing which I could not persuade myself to own and rear—and ran on.
“In about a month I hope to be a bridegroom,” continued Mr. Rochester; “and in the interim, I shall myself look out for employment and an asylum for you.”

“Thank you, sir; I am sorry to give—”

“Oh, no need to apologise!
None: as I have taken pains to prove: I caused a rumour to reach her that my fortune was not a third of what was supposed, and after that I presented myself to see the result; it was coldness both from her and her mother.
With little Adèle in my arms, I watched the slumber of childhood—so tranquil, so passionless, so innocent—and waited for the coming day: all my life was awake and astir in my frame: and as soon as the sun rose I rose too.
“Ah, childer!” said she, “it fair troubles me to go into yond’ room now: it looks so lonesome wi’ the chair empty and set back in a corner.”

She wiped her eyes with her apron: the two girls, grave before, looked sad now.
One reason of the distance yet observed between us was, that he was comparatively seldom at home: a large proportion of his time appeared devoted to visiting the sick and poor among the scattered population of his parish.
As I looked at his lofty forehead, still and pale as a white stone—at his fine lineaments fixed in study—I comprehended all at once that he would hardly make a good husband: that it would be a trying thing to be his wife.
They betray an unfortunate state of mind: they merit severe reproof: they would seem inexcusable, but that it is the duty of man to forgive his fellow even until seventy-and-seven times.”

I had finished the business now.
I, having vainly begged the wilful girl to rise and remove her wet things, left him preaching and her shivering, and betook myself to bed with little Hareton, who slept as fast as if everyone had been sleeping round him.
Direct me to her, as she won’t come to me!”

“We have none,” he answered; “you must wait on yourself!”

“Where must I sleep, then?” I sobbed; I was beyond regarding self-respect, weighed down by fatigue and wretchedness.
There was no sound through the house but the moaning wind, which shook the windows every now and then, the faint crackling of the coals, and the click of my snuffers as I removed at intervals the long wick of the candle.
Heathcliff, aware that his opponent was ignorant of the treatment received while insensible, called him deliriously intoxicated; and said he should not notice his atrocious conduct further, but advised him to get to bed.
And there she’ll see Linton, and all will be told as soon as ever we return; and I shall have the blame.”

“I want her to see Linton,” he answered; “he’s looking better these few days; it’s not often he’s fit to be seen.
I was half inclined to make it try; however, he moved off to open the door, and, as he raised the latch, he looked up to the inscription above, and said, with a stupid mixture of awkwardness and elation: ‘Miss Catherine!
We had just agreed the best destiny which could await Catherine would be a permission to continue resident at the Grange; at least during Linton’s life: he being allowed to join her there, and I to remain as housekeeper.
I’m tired—I’m stalled, Hareton!” And she leant her pretty head back against the sill, with half a yawn and half a sigh, and lapsed into an aspect of abstracted sadness: neither caring nor knowing whether we remarked her.
I would have departed by the back way, to get a last glimpse of Catherine and annoy old Joseph; but Hareton received orders to lead up my horse, and my host himself escorted me to the door, so I could not fulfil my wish.
But the house of Wuthering Heights is so large that the inmates have plenty of space for withdrawing out of its influence; and accordingly what inmates there were had stationed themselves not far from one of the windows.
He said he wouldn’t suffer a word to be uttered in his disparagement: if he were the devil, it didn’t signify; he would stand by him; and he’d rather she would abuse himself, as she used to, than begin on Mr. Heathcliff.
“He has stayed at home,” I thought, “and he’ll be all right to-day.” I prepared breakfast for the household, as was my usual custom, but told Hareton and Catherine to get theirs ere the master came down, for he lay late.
I concealed the fact of his having swallowed nothing for four days, fearing it might lead to trouble, and then, I am persuaded, he did not abstain on purpose: it was the consequence of his strange illness, not the cause.
Reed would have endured my presence more complacently; her children would have entertained for me more of the cordiality of fellow-feeling; the servants would have been less prone to make me the scapegoat of the nursery.
At dark I allowed Adèle to put away books and work, and to run downstairs; for, from the comparative silence below, and from the cessation of appeals to the door-bell, I conjectured that Mr. Rochester was now at liberty.
He then said that she was the daughter of a French opera-dancer, Céline Varens, towards whom he had once cherished what he called a “grande passion.” This passion Céline had professed to return with even superior ardour.
The best fun was with Madame Joubert: Miss Wilson was a poor sickly thing, lachrymose and low-spirited, not worth the trouble of vanquishing, in short; and Mrs. Grey was coarse and insensible; no blow took effect on her.
They generally run on the same theme—courtship; and promise to end in the same catastrophe—marriage.”

“And do you like that monotonous theme?”

“Positively, I don’t care about it: it is nothing to me.”

“Nothing to you?
It is your time now, little tyrant, but it will be mine presently; and when once I have fairly seized you, to have and to hold, I’ll just—figuratively speaking—attach you to a chain like this” (touching his watch-guard).
When your uncle received your letter intimating the contemplated union between yourself and Mr. Rochester, Mr. Mason, who was staying at Madeira to recruit his health, on his way back to Jamaica, happened to be with him.
It was well I had learnt that this elf must return to me—that it belonged to my house down below—or I could not have felt it pass away from under my hand, and seen it vanish behind the dim hedge, without singular regret.
I hope this delay will not have increased the difficulty of securing it.”

“Oh, no; since it is an employment which depends only on me to give, and you to accept.”

He again paused: there seemed a reluctance to continue.
“Briggs wrote to me of a Jane Eyre:” he said, “the advertisements demanded a Jane Eyre: I knew a Jane Elliott.—I confess I had my suspicions, but it was only yesterday afternoon they were at once resolved into certainty.
Deep was my gratification to find I had really a place in their unsophisticated hearts: I promised them that never a week should pass in future that I did not visit them, and give them an hour’s teaching in their school.
I had entreated him to keep quite clear of the house till everything was arranged: and, indeed, the bare idea of the commotion, at once sordid and trivial, going on within its walls sufficed to scare him to estrangement.
I comprehended how he should despise himself for the feverish influence it exercised over him; how he should wish to stifle and destroy it; how he should mistrust its ever conducting permanently to his happiness or hers.
It was as if I had heard a summons from Heaven—as if a visionary messenger, like him of Macedonia, had enounced, “Come over and help us!” But I was no apostle,—I could not behold the herald,—I could not receive his call.
As sure as I’m living, I’ll break the brat’s neck.”

Poor Hareton was squalling and kicking in his father’s arms with all his might, and redoubled his yells when he carried him upstairs and lifted him over the banister.
We thought a bolt had fallen in the middle of us; and Joseph swung on to his knees, beseeching the Lord to remember the patriarchs Noah and Lot, and, as in former times, spare the righteous, though he smote the ungodly.
“She has been dying for your sake several weeks, and raving about you this morning, and pouring forth a deluge of abuse, because I represented your failings in a plain light, for the purpose of mitigating her adoration.
Her life closed in a gentle dream—may she wake as kindly in the other world!”

“May she wake in torment!” he cried, with frightful vehemence, stamping his foot, and groaning in a sudden paroxysm of ungovernable passion.
“‘Oh, if God would but give me strength to strangle him in my last agony, I’d go to hell with joy,’ groaned the impatient man, writhing to rise, and sinking back in despair, convinced of his inadequacy for the struggle.
He had a fixed idea, I guessed by several observations he let fall, that, as his nephew resembled him in person, he would resemble him in mind; for Linton’s letters bore few or no indications of his defective character.
It is a long fight; I wish it were over!”

He began to pace the room, muttering terrible things to himself, till I was inclined to believe, as he said Joseph did, that conscience had turned his heart to an earthly hell.
Joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went: but he brought it back immediately, with the supper-tray in his other hand, explaining that Mr. Heathcliff was going to bed, and he wanted nothing to eat till morning.
For nearly three months, I had never been called to Mrs. Reed’s presence; restricted so long to the nursery, the breakfast, dining, and drawing-rooms were become for me awful regions, on which it dismayed me to intrude.
“Deceit is, indeed, a sad fault in a child,” said Mr. Brocklehurst; “it is akin to falsehood, and all liars will have their portion in the lake burning with fire and brimstone; she shall, however, be watched, Mrs. Reed.
I felt it would be injudicious to confine her too much at first; so, when I had talked to her a great deal, and got her to learn a little, and when the morning had advanced to noon, I allowed her to return to her nurse.
God wot I need not be too severe about others; I have a past existence, a series of deeds, a colour of life to contemplate within my own breast, which might well call my sneers and censures from my neighbours to myself.
Only one thing, I know: you said you were not as good as you should like to be, and that you regretted your own imperfection;—one thing I can comprehend: you intimated that to have a sullied memory was a perpetual bane.
Many a time, as a little child, I should have been glad to love you if you would have let me; and I long earnestly to be reconciled to you now: kiss me, aunt.”

I approached my cheek to her lips: she would not touch it.
I walked a while on the pavement; but a subtle, well-known scent—that of a cigar—stole from some window; I saw the library casement open a handbreadth; I knew I might be watched thence; so I went apart into the orchard.
I was not surprised, when I ran down into the hall, to see that a brilliant June morning had succeeded to the tempest of the night; and to feel, through the open glass door, the breathing of a fresh and fragrant breeze.
Once wrench your heart from man, and fix it on your Maker, the advancement of that Maker’s spiritual kingdom on earth will be your chief delight and endeavour; you will be ready to do at once whatever furthers that end.
It opened into the house, where the females were already astir; Zillah urging flakes of flame up the chimney with a colossal bellows; and Mrs. Heathcliff, kneeling on the hearth, reading a book by the aid of the blaze.
But the lady’s glowed with another feeling when her friend appeared at the door: she sprang forward, took both his hands, and led him to Linton; and then she seized Linton’s reluctant fingers and crushed them into his.
He walked up and down, with his hands in his pockets, apparently quite forgetting my presence; and his abstraction was evidently so deep, and his whole aspect so misanthropical, that I shrank from disturbing him again.
“‘But then,’ I continued, holding myself ready to flee, ‘if poor Catherine had trusted you, and assumed the ridiculous, contemptible, degrading title of Mrs. Heathcliff, she would soon have presented a similar picture!
Catherine, by instinct, must have divined it was obdurate perversity, and not dislike, that prompted this dogged conduct; for, after remaining an instant undecided, she stooped and impressed on his cheek a gentle kiss.
I get levers and mattocks to demolish the two houses, and train myself to be capable of working like Hercules, and when everything is ready and in my power, I find the will to lift a slate off either roof has vanished!
Bessie Lee must, I think, have been a girl of good natural capacity, for she was smart in all she did, and had a remarkable knack of narrative; so, at least, I judge from the impression made on me by her nursery tales.
She went on—

“You had this morning a breakfast which you could not eat; you must be hungry:—I have ordered that a lunch of bread and cheese shall be served to all.”

The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise.
I shuddered as I stood and looked round me: it was an inclement day for outdoor exercise; not positively rainy, but darkened by a drizzling yellow fog; all under foot was still soaking wet with the floods of yesterday.
If people were always kind and obedient to those who are cruel and unjust, the wicked people would have it all their own way: they would never feel afraid, and so they would never alter, but would grow worse and worse.
‘You like Thornfield?’ she said, lifting her finger; and then she wrote in the air a memento, which ran in lurid hieroglyphics all along the house-front, between the upper and lower row of windows, ‘Like it if you can!
Varens entered?”

I almost expected a rebuff for this hardly well-timed question, but, on the contrary, waking out of his scowling abstraction, he turned his eyes towards me, and the shade seemed to clear off his brow.
She wore an amber-coloured flower, too, in her hair: it contrasted well with the jetty mass of her curls.”

“She was greatly admired, of course?”

“Yes, indeed: and not only for her beauty, but for her accomplishments.
For a moment they stood grouped together at the other extremity of the gallery, conversing in a key of sweet subdued vivacity: they then descended the staircase almost as noiselessly as a bright mist rolls down a hill.
I know how soon youth would fade and bloom perish, if, in the cup of bliss offered, but one dreg of shame, or one flavour of remorse were detected; and I do not want sacrifice, sorrow, dissolution—such is not my taste.
No nook in the grounds more sheltered and more Eden-like; it was full of trees, it bloomed with flowers: a very high wall shut it out from the court, on one side; on the other, a beech avenue screened it from the lawn.
Compare these clear eyes with the red balls yonder—this face with that mask—this form with that bulk; then judge me, priest of the gospel and man of the law, and remember with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged!
“Only it forces rather strongly on the mind the picture of what might have been,” said Mr. Rivers, “and contrasts it somewhat too vividly with what is.”

He folded the letter, locked it in his desk, and again went out.
Goodbye!”

Happy at Moor House I was, and hard I worked; and so did Hannah: she was charmed to see how jovial I could be amidst the bustle of a house turned topsy-turvy—how I could brush, and dust, and clean, and cook.
Edgar stood on the hearth weeping silently, and in the middle of the table sat a little dog, shaking its paw and yelping; which, from their mutual accusations, we understood they had nearly pulled in two between them.
He had retired to private prayer in his chamber, and Mr. and Mrs. Earnshaw were engaging Missy’s attention by sundry gay trifles bought for her to present to the little Lintons, as an acknowledgment of their kindness.
“You’ll find him not so pliable as you calculate upon: and, though I’m hardly a judge, I think that’s the worst motive you’ve given yet for being the wife of young Linton.”

“It is not,” retorted she; “it is the best!
He must get accustomed to him, and he may as well like him: considering how Heathcliff has reason to object to him, I’m sure he behaved excellently!”

“What do you think of his going to Wuthering Heights?” I inquired.
Your cold blood cannot be worked into a fever: your veins are full of ice-water; but mine are boiling, and the sight of such chillness makes them dance.”

“To get rid of me, answer my question,” persevered Mr. Linton.
Is he actually so utterly indifferent for my life?”

“Why, ma’am,” I answered, “the master has no idea of your being deranged; and of course he does not fear that you will let yourself die of hunger.”

“You think not?
I was endeavouring to gather resolution for entering and taking possession, when my fool of a guide announced,—“This here is t’ maister’s.” My supper by this time was cold, my appetite gone, and my patience exhausted.
How did—?”

He endeavoured to pronounce the name, but could not manage it; and compressing his mouth he held a silent combat with his inward agony, defying, meanwhile, my sympathy with an unflinching, ferocious stare.
“Now, Ellen,” she said, when my task was finished and she was seated in an easy-chair on the hearth, with a cup of tea before her, “you sit down opposite me, and put poor Catherine’s baby away: I don’t like to see it!
Wish that he were dead, I must; and therefore I was fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for the consequences of my taunting speech, when he flung himself on Earnshaw’s weapon and wrenched it from his grasp.
And papa swore it was owing to me: he called me a pitiful, shuffling, worthless thing; and said you despised me; and if he had been in my place, he would be more the master of the Grange than your father by this time.
All her nice books are mine; she offered to give me them, and her pretty birds, and her pony Minny, if I would get the key of our room, and let her out; but I told her she had nothing to give, they were all, all mine.
I saw he meant to give her his company; and I guessed, by his way, he wanted to be presentable; so, laughing, as I durst not laugh when the master is by, I offered to help him, if he would, and joked at his confusion.
Say your prayers, Miss Eyre, when you are by yourself; for if you don’t repent, something bad might be permitted to come down the chimney and fetch you away.”

They went, shutting the door, and locking it behind them.
you can’t be silly enough to wish to leave such a splendid place?”

“If I had anywhere else to go, I should be glad to leave it; but I can never get away from Gateshead till I am a woman.”

“Perhaps you may—who knows?
I wonder if she lives alone except this little girl; if so, and if she is in any degree amiable, I shall surely be able to get on with her; I will do my best; it is a pity that doing one’s best does not always answer.
To be sure I am distantly related to the Rochesters by the mother’s side, or at least my husband was; he was a clergyman, incumbent of Hay—that little village yonder on the hill—and that church near the gates was his.
As I saw them with the spiritual eye, before I attempted to embody them, they were striking; but my hand would not second my fancy, and in each case it had wrought out but a pale portrait of the thing I had conceived.
My whim is gratified; and now I think Mr. Eshton will do well to put the hag in the stocks to-morrow morning, as he threatened.”

Miss Ingram took a book, leant back in her chair, and so declined further conversation.
I left Gateshead yesterday: and if you can get ready, Miss, I should like to take you back with me early to-morrow morning.”

“Yes, Robert, I shall be ready: it seems to me that I ought to go.”

“I think so too, Miss.
“I am in a condition to prove my allegation: an insuperable impediment to this marriage exists.”

Mr. Rochester heard, but heeded not: he stood stubborn and rigid, making no movement but to possess himself of my hand.
He looked up the pass and down the hollow; his glance wandered away with the stream, and returned to traverse the unclouded heaven which coloured it: he removed his hat, let the breeze stir his hair and kiss his brow.
And then they called out to him that she was on the roof, where she was standing, waving her arms, above the battlements, and shouting out till they could hear her a mile off: I saw her and heard her with my own eyes.
Edgar Linton, as multitudes have been before and will be after him, was infatuated: and believed himself the happiest man alive on the day he led her to Gimmerton Chapel, three years subsequent to his father’s death.
There were some persons sitting at cards; Heathcliff joined them; my brother lost some money to him, and, finding him plentifully supplied, he requested that he would come again in the evening: to which he consented.
Inform Edgar that I’d give the world to see his face again—that my heart returned to Thrushcross Grange in twenty-four hours after I left it, and is there at this moment, full of warm feelings for him, and Catherine!
Don’t trouble him with questions on the subject: it will disturb him, for no good.”

The boy was fully occupied with his own cogitations for the remainder of the ride, till we halted before the farmhouse garden-gate.
He is fond of reading, and he thinks of leaving soon to get married; so he offered, if I would lend him books out of the library, to do what I wished: but I preferred giving him my own, and that satisfied him better.
Five nights and four days I remained, altogether, seeing nobody but Hareton once every morning; and he was a model of a jailor: surly, and dumb, and deaf to every attempt at moving his sense of justice or compassion.
“Now, Mrs. Dean,” Zillah went on, seeing me not pleased by her manner, “you happen think your young lady too fine for Mr. Hareton; and happen you’re right: but I own I should love well to bring her pride a peg lower.
The little wretch had done her utmost to hurt her cousin’s sensitive though uncultivated feelings, and a physical argument was the only mode he had of balancing the account, and repaying its effects on the inflictor.
He trembled, and his face glowed: all his rudeness and all his surly harshness had deserted him: he could not summon courage, at first, to utter a syllable in reply to her questioning look, and her murmured petition.
Yes, Mrs. Reed, to you I owe some fearful pangs of mental suffering, but I ought to forgive you, for you knew not what you did: while rending my heart-strings, you thought you were only uprooting my bad propensities.
From this deficiency of nourishment resulted an abuse, which pressed hardly on the younger pupils: whenever the famished great girls had an opportunity, they would coax or menace the little ones out of their portion.
“I dare say they’ve not kept you too well at school: Miss Reed is the head and shoulders taller than you are; and Miss Georgiana would make two of you in breadth.”

“Georgiana is handsome, I suppose, Bessie?”

“Very.
Sometimes I saw her: she would come out of her room with a basin, or a plate, or a tray in her hand, go down to the kitchen and shortly return, generally (oh, romantic reader, forgive me for telling the plain truth!)
How could I possibly prefer the spoilt pet of a wealthy family, who would hate her governess as a nuisance, to a lonely little orphan, who leans towards her as a friend?”

“Oh, that is the light in which you view it!
I had not intended to love him; the reader knows I had wrought hard to extirpate from my soul the germs of love there detected; and now, at the first renewed view of him, they spontaneously arrived, green and strong!
Even when that weather was broken, and continuous rain set in for some days, no damp seemed cast over enjoyment: indoor amusements only became more lively and varied, in consequence of the stop put to outdoor gaiety.
What crime was this, that lived incarnate in this sequestered mansion, and could neither be expelled nor subdued by the owner?—what mystery, that broke out now in fire and now in blood, at the deadest hours of night?
Such society revives, regenerates: you feel better days come back—higher wishes, purer feelings; you desire to recommence your life, and to spend what remains to you of days in a way more worthy of an immortal being.
I knew by her stony eye—opaque to tenderness, indissoluble to tears—that she was resolved to consider me bad to the last; because to believe me good would give her no generous pleasure: only a sense of mortification.
Let me have them.”

She consented; and she even brought me a clean towel to spread over my dress, “lest,” as she said, “I should mucky it.”

“Ye’ve not been used to sarvant’s wark, I see by your hands,” she remarked.
She said I was like Mr. Rivers, only, certainly, she allowed, “not one-tenth so handsome, though I was a nice neat little soul enough, but he was an angel.” I was, however, good, clever, composed, and firm, like him.
I knew his thoughts well, and could read his heart plainly; at the moment I felt calmer and cooler than he: I had then temporarily the advantage of him, and I conceived an inclination to do him some good, if I could.
The craving to know what had become of him followed me everywhere; when I was at Morton, I re-entered my cottage every evening to think of that; and now at Moor House, I sought my bedroom each night to brood over it.
Cease to look so melancholy, my dear master; you shall not be left desolate, so long as I live.”

He replied not: he seemed serious—abstracted; he sighed; he half-opened his lips as if to speak: he closed them again.
He told Zillah to give me a glass of brandy, and then passed on to the inner room; while she condoled with me on my sorry predicament, and having obeyed his orders, whereby I was somewhat revived, ushered me to bed.
He drove him from their company to the servants, deprived him of the instructions of the curate, and insisted that he should labour out of doors instead; compelling him to do so as hard as any other lad on the farm.
I refused to go without Cathy; he dragged me into the garden, pushed the lantern into my hand, assured me that Mr. Earnshaw should be informed of my behaviour, and, bidding me march directly, secured the door again.
Had it been dark, I daresay he would have tried to remedy the mistake by smashing Hareton’s skull on the steps; but, we witnessed his salvation; and I was presently below with my precious charge pressed to my heart.
I can’t follow it though—(these words are underlined)—they need not expect me, and they may draw what conclusions they please; taking care, however, to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or deficient affection.
I had sought shelter at Wuthering Heights, almost gladly, because I was secured by that arrangement from living alone with him; but he knew the people we were coming amongst, and he did not fear their intermeddling.
I experienced pleasure in being able to exasperate him: the sense of pleasure woke my instinct of self-preservation, so I fairly broke free; and if ever I come into his hands again he is welcome to a signal revenge.
She was the most winning thing that ever brought sunshine into a desolate house: a real beauty in face, with the Earnshaws’ handsome dark eyes, but the Lintons’ fair skin and small features, and yellow curling hair.
If a servant chanced to vex her, it was always—“I shall tell papa!” And if he reproved her, even by a look, you would have thought it a heart-breaking business: I don’t believe he ever did speak a harsh word to her.
The summer shone in full prime; and she took such a taste for this solitary rambling that she often contrived to remain out from breakfast till tea; and then the evenings were spent in recounting her fanciful tales.
Therefore, you must not mention it, unless you be careless of seeing your cousin hereafter: you may come, if you will, but you must not mention it.”

“Why did you quarrel?” asked Catherine, considerably crestfallen.
But he was too timid in giving satisfactory reasons for his wish that she should shun connection with the household of the Heights, and Catherine liked good reasons for every restraint that harassed her petted will.
Still, I was not rid of him: when at length they compelled me to depart, and I had got some hundred yards off the premises, he suddenly issued from the shadow of the road-side, and checked Minny and took hold of me.
“But I must remain with my mistress: to mind your son is not my business.”

“You are very stiff,” said Heathcliff, “I know that: but you’ll force me to pinch the baby and make it scream before it moves your charity.
I suppose this resemblance disarmed Mr. Heathcliff: he walked to the hearth in evident agitation; but it quickly subsided as he looked at the young man: or, I should say, altered its character; for it was there yet.
I was still pondering the signification of “Institution,” and endeavouring to make out a connection between the first words and the verse of Scripture, when the sound of a cough close behind me made me turn my head.
With earliest day, I was up: I had my advertisement written, enclosed, and directed before the bell rang to rouse the school; it ran thus:—

“A young lady accustomed to tuition” (had I not been a teacher two years?)
A little hamlet, whose roofs were blent with trees, straggled up the side of one of these hills; the church of the district stood nearer Thornfield: its old tower-top looked over a knoll between the house and gates.
What good it would have done me at that time to have been tossed in the storms of an uncertain struggling life, and to have been taught by rough and bitter experience to long for the calm amidst which I now repined!
Will you let me have another cup?”

I was about again to revert to the probability of a union between Mr. Rochester and the beautiful Blanche; but Adèle came in, and the conversation was turned into another channel.
It was well I secured this forage, or both she, I, and Sophie, to whom I conveyed a share of our repast, would have run a chance of getting no dinner at all: every one downstairs was too much engaged to think of us.
It looked all brown and black: elf-locks bristled out from beneath a white band which passed under her chin, and came half over her cheeks, or rather jaws: her eye confronted me at once, with a bold and direct gaze.
Strong wind, earthquake-shock, and fire may pass by: but I shall follow the guiding of that still small voice which interprets the dictates of conscience.’

“Well said, forehead; your declaration shall be respected.
I asked her once what was the great attraction of that volume, and she said, “the Rubric.” Three hours she gave to stitching, with gold thread, the border of a square crimson cloth, almost large enough for a carpet.
Don’t address me as if I were a beauty; I am your plain, Quakerish governess.”

“You are a beauty in my eyes, and a beauty just after the desire of my heart,—delicate and aërial.”

“Puny and insignificant, you mean.
It began calm—and indeed, as far as delivery and pitch of voice went, it was calm to the end: an earnestly felt, yet strictly restrained zeal breathed soon in the distinct accents, and prompted the nervous language.
“Half-an-hour ago,” he pursued, “I spoke of my impatience to hear the sequel of a tale: on reflection, I find the matter will be better managed by my assuming the narrator’s part, and converting you into a listener.
“And I shall see it again,” he said aloud, “in dreams when I sleep by the Ganges: and again in a more remote hour—when another slumber overcomes me—on the shore of a darker stream!”

Strange words of a strange love!
In the village school I found you could perform well, punctually, uprightly, labour uncongenial to your habits and inclinations; I saw you could perform it with capacity and tact: you could win while you controlled.
He sees nothing attractive in me; not even youth—only a few useful mental points.—Then I must leave you, sir, to go to him?”

I shuddered involuntarily, and clung instinctively closer to my blind but beloved master.
When the preparations were finished, he invited me with—“Now, sir, bring forward your chair.” And we all, including the rustic youth, drew round the table: an austere silence prevailing while we discussed our meal.
Its occupants had recommenced their angry discussion: Mrs. Linton, at least, was scolding with renewed vigour; Heathcliff had moved to the window, and hung his head, somewhat cowed by her violent rating apparently.
I remember not a single thing about him!”

“Why, Master Linton,” said I, “three hundred miles is a great distance; and ten years seem very different in length to a grown-up person compared with what they do to you.
“Do you want me to go, Linton?”

“You can’t alter what you’ve done,” he replied pettishly, shrinking from her, “unless you alter it for the worse by teasing me into a fever.”

“Well, then, I must go?” she repeated.
“Give it.”

“You are aware, Mr. Heathcliff,” I said, “that from the time you were thirteen years old you have lived a selfish, unchristian life; and probably hardly had a Bible in your hands during all that period.
The world may not like to see these ideas dissevered, for it has been accustomed to blend them; finding it convenient to make external show pass for sterling worth—to let white-washed walls vouch for clean shrines.
why, she is too old for such pettishness.”

I thought so too; and my self-esteem being wounded by the false charge, I answered promptly, “I never cried for such a thing in my life: I hate going out in the carriage.
I had brushed my black stuff travelling-dress, prepared my bonnet, gloves, and muff; sought in all my drawers to see that no article was left behind; and now having nothing more to do, I sat down and tried to rest.
I was mortally afraid of its trampling forefeet
“I see,” he said, “the mountain will never be brought to Mahomet, so all you can do is to aid Mahomet to go to the mountain; I must beg of you to come here.”

I came.
“Let Miss Eyre be seated,” said he: and there was something in the forced stiff bow, in the impatient yet formal tone, which seemed further to express, “What the deuce is it to me whether Miss Eyre be there or not?
And then, after all, I go too fast in my conclusions: for what I yet know, you may be no better than the rest; you may have intolerable defects to counterbalance your few good points.”

“And so may you,” I thought.
Ere I permitted myself to request an explanation, I tied the string of Adèle’s pinafore, which happened to be loose: having helped her also to another bun and refilled her mug with milk, I said, nonchalantly—

“Mr.
I have myself—I tell it you without parable—been a worldly, dissipated, restless man; and I believe I have found the instrument for my cure in—”

He paused: the birds went on carolling, the leaves lightly rustling.
“If you please, sir, I want leave of absence for a week or two.”

“What to do?—where to go?”

“To see a sick lady who has sent for me.”

“What sick lady?—where does she live?”

“At Gateshead; in ——shire.”

“-shire?
but not quite the thing,” I thought, as I surveyed the effect: “they want more force and spirit;” and I wrought the shades blacker, that the lights might flash more brilliantly—a happy touch or two secured success.
Mrs. Fairfax surprised me by looking out of the window with a sad countenance, and saying gravely—“Miss Eyre, will you come to breakfast?” During the meal she was quiet and cool: but I could not undeceive her then.
You have been over-excited, or over-fatigued.”

“Do you, sir, feel calm and happy?”

“Calm?—no: but happy—to the heart’s core.”

I looked up at him to read the signs of bliss in his face: it was ardent and flushed.
A dog—old Carlo, Mr. Rivers’ pointer, as I saw in a moment—was pushing the gate with his nose, and St. John himself leant upon it with folded arms; his brow knit, his gaze, grave almost to displeasure, fixed on me.
It seemed to me that, should he become the possessor of Mr. Oliver’s large fortune, he might do as much good with it as if he went and laid his genius out to wither, and his strength to waste, under a tropical sun.
How long it had been searching me through and through, and over and over, I cannot tell: so keen was it, and yet so cold, I felt for the moment superstitious—as if I were sitting in the room with something uncanny.
hear me this time, Catherine, at last!” The spectre showed a spectre’s ordinary caprice: it gave no sign of being; but the snow and wind whirled wildly through, even reaching my station, and blowing out the light.
I urged my companion to hasten now and show his amiable humour, and he willingly obeyed; but ill luck would have it that, as he opened the door leading from the kitchen on one side, Hindley opened it on the other.
The former offered me munificent wages; the latter ordered me to pack up: he wanted no women in the house, he said, now that there was no mistress; and as to Hareton, the curate should take him in hand, by-and-by.
Both the expressions flitting over her face, and the changes of her moods, began to alarm me terribly; and brought to my recollection her former illness, and the doctor’s injunction that she should not be crossed.
Mr. Earnshaw was, of course, invited to attend the remains of his sister to the grave; he sent no excuse, but he never came; so that, besides her husband, the mourners were wholly composed of tenants and servants.
“He thought me too poor to wed his sister,” answered Heathcliff, “and was grieved that I got her: his pride was hurt, and he’ll never forgive it.”

“That’s wrong!” said the young lady: “some time I’ll tell him so.
Some of them struck me as singularly odd compounds of ardour and flatness; commencing in strong feeling, and concluding in the affected, wordy style that a schoolboy might use to a fancied, incorporeal sweetheart.
I thought the memory of the hour I came down that glen a bridegroom would be less sweet than the anticipation that I was soon, in a few months, or, possibly, weeks, to be carried up, and laid in its lonely hollow!
As to your promise to marry Linton, I’ll take care you shall keep it; for you shall not quit this place till it is fulfilled.”

“Send Ellen, then, to let papa know I’m safe!” exclaimed Catherine, weeping bitterly.
She wept to miss one evening, because you would be disappointed; and you felt then that she was a hundred times too good to you: and now you believe the lies your father tells, though you know he detests you both.
“The first thing Mrs. Linton did,” she said, “on her arrival at the Heights, was to run upstairs, without even wishing good-evening to me and Joseph; she shut herself into Linton’s room, and remained till morning.
“‘He’s safe, and I’m free,’ she answered: ‘I should feel well—but,’ she continued, with a bitterness she couldn’t conceal, ‘you have left me so long to struggle against death alone, that I feel and see only death!
But her ingenuity was at work to remedy the injury: while I ironed, or pursued other such stationary employments as I could not well do in the parlour, she would bring some pleasant volume and read it aloud to me.
Bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room, and having washed her hands, she opened a certain little drawer, full of splendid shreds of silk and satin, and began making a new bonnet for Georgiana’s doll.
Meantime she sang: her song was—

“In the days when we went gipsying,
    A long time ago.”

I had often heard the song before, and always with lively delight; for Bessie had a sweet voice,—at least, I thought so.
I was standing before him; he fixed his eyes on me very steadily: his eyes were small and grey; not very bright, but I dare say I should think them shrewd now: he had a hard-featured yet good-natured looking face.
I was making my bed, having received strict orders from Bessie to get it arranged before she returned (for Bessie now frequently employed me as a sort of under-nurserymaid, to tidy the room, dust the chairs, &c.).
The night passed rapidly: I was too tired even to dream; I only once awoke to hear the wind rave in furious gusts, and the rain fall in torrents, and to be sensible that Miss Miller had taken her place by my side.
“You see she is yet young; you observe she possesses the ordinary form of childhood; God has graciously given her the shape that He has given to all of us; no signal deformity points her out as a marked character.
“is desirous of meeting with a situation in a private family where the children are under fourteen” (I thought that as I was barely eighteen, it would not do to undertake the guidance of pupils nearer my own age).
It revealed, too, a group near the mantelpiece: I had scarcely caught it, and scarcely become aware of a cheerful mingling of voices, amongst which I seemed to distinguish the tones of Adèle, when the door closed.
I’ll try if I cannot discover the secret spring of your confidence, and find an aperture in that marble breast through which I can shed one drop of the balm of sympathy.”

“Is this portrait like?” I asked bluntly.
Of Mr. Rochester’s character I know nothing, but the one fact that he professed to offer honourable marriage to this young girl, and that at the very altar she discovered he had a wife yet alive, though a lunatic.
The event of the day—that is, the return of Diana and Mary—pleased him; but the accompaniments of that event, the glad tumult, the garrulous glee of reception irked him: I saw he wished the calmer morrow was come.
His idea was still with me, because it was not a vapour sunshine could disperse, nor a sand-traced effigy storms could wash away; it was a name graven on a tablet, fated to last as long as the marble it inscribed.
Religion called—Angels beckoned—God commanded—life rolled together like a scroll—death’s gates opening, showed eternity beyond: it seemed, that for safety and bliss there, all here might be sacrificed in a second.
The whole looked, as the host of the Rochester Arms had said, “quite a desolate spot.” It was as still as a church on a week-day: the pattering rain on the forest leaves was the only sound audible in its vicinage.
After supper, he began to ask me many questions, of where I had been, what I had been doing, how I had found him out; but I gave him only very partial replies: it was too late to enter into particulars that night.
He took to Heathcliff strangely, believing all he said (for that matter, he said precious little, and generally the truth), and petting him up far above Cathy, who was too mischievous and wayward for a favourite.
He was not insolent to his benefactor, he was simply insensible; though knowing perfectly the hold he had on his heart, and conscious he had only to speak and all the house would be obliged to bend to his wishes.
I couldn’t withhold giving some loose to my indignation; but Catherine angrily insisted on silence, and threatened to order me out of the kitchen, if I dared to be so presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue.
He often asked about the infant, when he saw me; and on hearing its name, smiled grimly, and observed: “They wish me to hate it too, do they?”

“I don’t think they wish you to know anything about it,” I answered.
Don’t use any bad words; and don’t stare when the young lady is not looking at you, and be ready to hide your face when she is; and, when you speak, say your words slowly, and keep your hands out of your pockets.
He could not bear to discourse long upon the topic; for though he spoke little of it, he still felt the same horror and detestation of his ancient enemy that had occupied his heart ever since Mrs. Linton’s death.
I was terrified at the devastation which had been accomplished in a brief half-hour; the black-currant trees were the apple of Joseph’s eye, and she had just fixed her choice of a flower-bed in the midst of them.
I frowned, and then she glanced towards the master: whose mind was occupied on other subjects than his company, as his countenance evinced; and she grew serious for an instant, scrutinizing him with deep gravity.
Though he seldom before had revealed this state of mind, even by looks, it was his habitual mood, I had no doubt: he asserted it himself; but not a soul, from his general bearing, would have conjectured the fact.
And then I set myself to reflect how I had tended him in infancy, and watched him grow to youth, and followed him almost through his whole course; and what absurd nonsense it was to yield to that sense of horror.
I sat, a model of patience, trying to attract his absorbed attention from its engrossing speculation; till he grew irritable, and got up, asking why I would not allow him to have his own time in taking his meals?
Yet such, I grieve to say, is the case.”

A pause—in which I began to steady the palsy of my nerves, and to feel that the Rubicon was passed; and that the trial, no longer to be shirked, must be firmly sustained.
How far are we on our road now, I wonder?”

I let down the window and looked out; Millcote was behind us; judging by the number of its lights, it seemed a place of considerable magnitude, much larger than Lowton.
Not valuing now the root whence it sprang; having found that it was of a sort which nothing but gold dust could manure, I have but half a liking to the blossom, especially when it looks so artificial as just now.
I heaved them up, deluged the bed and its occupant, flew back to my own room, brought my own water-jug, baptized the couch afresh, and, by God’s aid, succeeded in extinguishing the flames which were devouring it.
she wants to know my habits, that she may lay her plans accordingly!” Indignation again prevailed over prudence: I replied sharply, “Hitherto I have often omitted to fasten the bolt: I did not think it necessary.
The tall and phlegmatic Lord Ingram leans with folded arms on the chair-back of the little and lively Amy Eshton; she glances up at him, and chatters like a wren: she likes him better than she does Mr. Rochester.
Did he give his name?”

“His name is Mason, sir; and he comes from the West Indies; from Spanish Town, in Jamaica, I think.”

Mr. Rochester was standing near me; he had taken my hand, as if to lead me to a chair.
He supplicated strength for the weak-hearted; guidance for wanderers from the fold: a return, even at the eleventh hour, for those whom the temptations of the world and the flesh were luring from the narrow path.
Firm, faithful, and devoted, full of energy, and zeal, and truth, he labours for his race; he clears their painful way to improvement; he hews down like a giant the prejudices of creed and caste that encumber it.
You had distinctly impressed on me the idea that Catherine was the whole joy of your life: I can’t imagine how you think of surviving her loss.’

“‘He’s there, is he?’ exclaimed my companion, rushing to the gap.
It gave Joseph satisfaction, apparently, to watch him go the worst lengths: he allowed that the lad was ruined: that his soul was abandoned to perdition; but then he reflected that Heathcliff must answer for it.
Mr. Edgar encouraged me to gain information: he thought a great deal about him, I fancy, and would have run some risk to see him; and he told me once to ask the housekeeper whether he ever came into the village?
Take her into the garden, before you change your shoes; and into the stable to see your horse.”

“Wouldn’t you rather sit here?” asked Linton, addressing Cathy in a tone which expressed reluctance to move again.
Rise, and don’t degrade yourself into an abject reptile—don’t!”

With streaming face and an expression of agony, Linton had thrown his nerveless frame along the ground: he seemed convulsed with exquisite terror.
I dreamt I was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper, with my heart stopped and my cheek frozen against hers.”

“And if she had been dissolved into earth, or worse, what would you have dreamt of then?” I said.
My mother said, when she came to see me last week, that she would not like a little one of her own to be in your place.—Now, come in, and I’ve some good news for you.”

“I don’t think you have, Bessie.”

“Child!
“Helen!” I whispered softly, “are you awake?”

She stirred herself, put back the curtain, and I saw her face, pale, wasted, but quite composed: she looked so little changed that my fear was instantly dissipated.
Mr. Rochester was Mr. Rochester in her eyes; a gentleman, a landed proprietor—nothing more: she inquired and searched no further, and evidently wondered at my wish to gain a more definite notion of his identity.
Already it has done me good: my heart was a sort of charnel; it will now be a shrine.”

“To speak truth, sir, I don’t understand you at all: I cannot keep up the conversation, because it has got out of my depth.
The hiss of the quenched element, the breakage of a pitcher which I flung from my hand when I had emptied it, and, above all, the splash of the shower-bath I had liberally bestowed, roused Mr. Rochester at last.
Lastly, I saw Mr. Mason was submissive to Mr. Rochester; that the impetuous will of the latter held complete sway over the inertness of the former: the few words which had passed between them assured me of this.
One day, however, as she put away her account-book and unfolded her embroidery, she suddenly took her up thus—

“Georgiana, a more vain and absurd animal than you was certainly never allowed to cumber the earth.
But you have not yet asked for anything; you have prayed a gift to be withdrawn: try again.”

“Well then, sir, have the goodness to gratify my curiosity, which is much piqued on one point.”

He looked disturbed.
station!—your station is in my heart, and on the necks of those who would insult you, now or hereafter.—Go.”

I was soon dressed; and when I heard Mr. Rochester quit Mrs. Fairfax’s parlour, I hurried down to it.
They had lived very little at home for a long while, and were only come now to stay a few weeks on account of their father’s death; but they did so like Marsh End and Morton, and all these moors and hills about.
St. John put away my books and his, locked his desk, and said—

“Now, Jane, you shall take a walk; and with me.”

“I will call Diana and Mary.”

“No; I want only one companion this morning, and that must be you.
And now, say how you love him?”

“As everybody loves—You’re silly, Nelly.”

“Not at all—Answer.”

“I love the ground under his feet, and the air over his head, and everything he touches, and every word he says.
Mr. Linton had put on her pillow, in the morning, a handful of golden crocuses; her eye, long stranger to any gleam of pleasure, caught them in waking, and shone delighted as she gathered them eagerly together.
When I recollect how happy we were—how happy Catherine was before he came—I’m fit to curse the day.’

“Most likely, Heathcliff noticed more the truth of what was said, than the spirit of the person who said it.
Mr. Linton was extremely reluctant to consent, but I pleaded eloquently for the friendless condition in which he lay; and I said my old master and foster-brother had a claim on my services as strong as his own.
He imagined himself to be as accomplished as Linton, I suppose, because he could spell his own name; and was marvellously discomfited that I didn’t think the same.”

“Stop, Miss Catherine, dear!”—I interrupted.
“Joseph and I generally go to chapel on Sundays:” the kirk, you know, has no minister now, explained Mrs. Dean; and they call the Methodists’ or Baptists’ place (I can’t say which it is) at Gimmerton, a chapel.
It was eleven o’clock, and I announced my intention of going in and waiting for him; at which he immediately flung down his tools and accompanied me, in the office of watchdog, not as a substitute for the host.
“Remove them yourself,” she said, pushing them from her as soon as she had done; and retiring to a stool by the window, where she began to carve figures of birds and beasts out of the turnip-parings in her lap.
His emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs he drew, as he solemnly spread his large Bible on the table, and overlaid it with dirty bank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of the day’s transactions.
Then she comprehended that Earnshaw took the master’s reputation home to himself; and was attached by ties stronger than reason could break—chains, forged by habit, which it would be cruel to attempt to loosen.
Seen by the dim light of the dips, their number to me appeared countless, though not in reality exceeding eighty; they were uniformly dressed in brown stuff frocks of quaint fashion, and long holland pinafores.
When it came to my turn, I drank, for I was thirsty, but did not touch the food, excitement and fatigue rendering me incapable of eating: I now saw, however, that it was a thin oaten cake shared into fragments.
While sobbing out this wish in broken accents, some one approached: I started up—again Helen Burns was near me; the fading fires just showed her coming up the long, vacant room; she brought my coffee and bread.
When the typhus fever had fulfilled its mission of devastation at Lowood, it gradually disappeared from thence; but not till its virulence and the number of its victims had drawn public attention on the school.
Far and wide, on each side, there were only fields, where no cattle now browsed; and the little brown birds, which stirred occasionally in the hedge, looked like single russet leaves that had forgotten to drop.
Most people would have termed her a splendid woman of her age: and so she was, no doubt, physically speaking; but then there was an expression of almost insupportable haughtiness in her bearing and countenance.
You have seen my daughters?”

“Yes.”

“Well, you may tell them I wish you to stay till I can talk some things over with you I have on my mind: to-night it is too late, and I have a difficulty in recalling them.
Sweet-briar and southernwood, jasmine, pink, and rose have long been yielding their evening sacrifice of incense: this new scent is neither of shrub nor flower; it is—I know it well—it is Mr. Rochester’s cigar.
Ten years since, I flew through Europe half mad; with disgust, hate, and rage as my companions: now I shall revisit it healed and cleansed, with a very angel as my comforter.”

I laughed at him as he said this.
“If I could go out of life now, without too sharp a pang, it would be well for me,” I thought; “then I should not have to make the effort of cracking my heart-strings in rending them from among Mr. Rochester’s.
It is cruel—she cannot help being mad.”

“Jane, my little darling (so I will call you, for so you are), you don’t know what you are talking about; you misjudge me again: it is not because she is mad I hate her.
She broke forth as never moon yet burst from cloud: a hand first penetrated the sable folds and waved them away; then, not a moon, but a white human form shone in the azure, inclining a glorious brow earthward.
Would not a life devoted to the task of regenerating your race be well spent?”

“Yes,” I said; “but I could not go on for ever so: I want to enjoy my own faculties as well as to cultivate those of other people.
St. John—you know him—would urge you to impossibilities: with him there would be no permission to rest during the hot hours; and unfortunately, I have noticed, whatever he exacts, you force yourself to perform.
I proceeded: at last my way opened, the trees thinned a little; presently I beheld a railing, then the house—scarce, by this dim light, distinguishable from the trees; so dank and green were its decaying walls.
I had indeed made my proposal from the idea that he wished and would ask me to be his wife: an expectation, not the less certain because unexpressed, had buoyed me up, that he would claim me at once as his own.
As she grew up, a sound English education corrected in a great measure her French defects; and when she left school, I found in her a pleasing and obliging companion: docile, good-tempered, and well-principled.
Such an individual seated in his arm-chair, his mug of ale frothing on the round table before him, is to be seen in any circuit of five or six miles among these hills, if you go at the right time after dinner.
I “never told my love” vocally; still, if looks have language, the merest idiot might have guessed I was over head and ears: she understood me at last, and looked a return—the sweetest of all imaginable looks.
To my confusion, I discovered the yell was not ideal: hasty footsteps approached my chamber door; somebody pushed it open, with a vigorous hand, and a light glimmered through the squares at the top of the bed.
I was frightened, and Mrs. Earnshaw was ready to fling it out of doors: she did fly up, asking how he could fashion to bring that gipsy brat into the house, when they had their own bairns to feed and fend for?
I spared a minute to open the gate for it, but instead of going to the house door, it coursed up and down snuffing the grass, and would have escaped to the road, had I not seized it and conveyed it in with me.
The old cynic chose to be vastly offended at this nicety; assuring me, repeatedly, that “the barn was every bit as good” as I, “and every bit as wollsome,” and wondering how I could fashion to be so conceited.
I saw the old man-servant shared largely in his master’s scorn of the child; though he was compelled to retain the sentiment in his heart, because Heathcliff plainly meant his underlings to hold him in honour.
“No, it was not because I disliked Mr. Heathcliff, but because Mr. Heathcliff dislikes me; and is a most diabolical man, delighting to wrong and ruin those he hates, if they give him the slightest opportunity.
We were in the library, the master having gone to bed: she consented, rather unwillingly, I fancied; and imagining my sort of books did not suit her, I bid her please herself in the choice of what she perused.
“On the morrow I was sad; partly because you were poorly, and partly that I wished my father knew, and approved of my excursions: but it was beautiful moonlight after tea; and, as I rode on, the gloom cleared.
“And I won’t conceal that I have been sadly disappointed with our meeting; though I’ll mention it to nobody but you: not that I stand in awe of Mr. Heathcliff.”

“Hush,” murmured Linton; “for God’s sake, hush!
Then he bid us go upstairs, through the kitchen, to Zillah’s chamber; and I whispered my companion to obey: perhaps we might contrive to get through the window there, or into a garret, and out by its skylight.
I reached the Grange before sunset, and knocked for admittance; but the family had retreated into the back premises, I judged, by one thin, blue wreath, curling from the kitchen chimney, and they did not hear.
This is ‘Fairy Annie’s Wedding’—a bonny tune—it goes to a dance.”

Mrs. Dean was about to recommence, when I advanced; and recognising me directly, she jumped to her feet, crying—“Why, bless you, Mr. Lockwood!
“Yes,” answered Mrs. Dean, “as soon as they are married, and that will be on New Year’s Day.”

“And who will live here then?”

“Why, Joseph will take care of the house, and, perhaps, a lad to keep him company.
And there is another thing which surprised me; I find, in settling accounts with the housekeeper, that a lunch, consisting of bread and cheese, has twice been served out to the girls during the past fortnight.
I did; whereupon began a heaving, stamping, clattering process, accompanied by a barking and baying which removed me effectually some yards’ distance; but I would not be driven quite away till I saw the event.
He had a dark face, with stern features and a heavy brow; his eyes and gathered eyebrows looked ireful and thwarted just now; he was past youth, but had not reached middle-age; perhaps he might be thirty-five.
For herself, she did nothing but caper about in the front chambers, jump on and off the bedsteads, and lie on the mattresses and piled-up bolsters and pillows before the enormous fires roaring in the chimneys.
I must watch this ghastly countenance—these blue, still lips forbidden to unclose—these eyes now shut, now opening, now wandering through the room, now fixing on me, and ever glazed with the dulness of horror.
Carter, assure him there’s no danger.”

“I can do that conscientiously,” said Carter, who had now undone the bandages; “only I wish I could have got here sooner: he would not have bled so much—but how is this?
Glancing at the bookcases, I thought I could distinguish the two volumes of Bewick’s British Birds occupying their old place on the third shelf, and Gulliver’s Travels and the Arabian Nights ranged just above.
I remember something, too, of the green grave-mounds; and I have not forgotten, either, two figures of strangers straying amongst the low hillocks and reading the mementoes graven on the few mossy head-stones.
It spoke to my spirit: immeasurably distant was the tone, yet so near, it whispered in my heart—

“My daughter, flee temptation.”

“Mother, I will.”

So I answered after I had waked from the trance-like dream.
Diana and Mary relieved me by turning their eyes elsewhere than to my crimsoned visage; but the colder and sterner brother continued to gaze, till the trouble he had excited forced out tears as well as colour.
“My sisters, you see, have a pleasure in keeping you,” said Mr. St. John, “as they would have a pleasure in keeping and cherishing a half-frozen bird, some wintry wind might have driven through their casement.
“Mary Garrett’s mother is better, and Mary came back to the school this morning, and I shall have four new girls next week from the Foundry Close—they would have come to-day but for the snow.”

“Indeed!”

“Mr.
My eye involuntarily wandered to the grey church tower near the gates, and I asked, “Is he with Damer de Rochester, sharing the shelter of his narrow marble house?”

Some answer must be had to these questions.
This parlour looked gloomy: a neglected handful of fire burnt low in the grate; and, leaning over it, with his head supported against the high, old-fashioned mantelpiece, appeared the blind tenant of the room.
I find you rather alarming, when I examine you close at hand: you talk of my being a fairy, but I am sure, you are more like a brownie.”

“Am I hideous, Jane?”

“Very, sir: you always were, you know.”

“Humph!
Heathcliff was dangerously sick; and while he lay at the worst he would have me constantly by his pillow: I suppose he felt I did a good deal for him, and he hadn’t wit to guess that I was compelled to do it.
Then the woman-servant brought a basin of warm water, and washed her feet; and Mr. Linton mixed a tumbler of negus, and Isabella emptied a plateful of cakes into her lap, and Edgar stood gaping at a distance.
She had a wondrous constancy to old attachments: even Heathcliff kept his hold on her affections unalterably; and young Linton, with all his superiority, found it difficult to make an equally deep impression.
Your brother will be pleased; the old lady and gentleman will not object, I think; you will escape from a disorderly, comfortless home into a wealthy, respectable one; and you love Edgar, and Edgar loves you.
It is both mean and presumptuous to add your torture to his!”

“In general I’ll allow that it would be, Ellen,” she continued; “but what misery laid on Heathcliff could content me, unless I have a hand in it?
I wonder what lies on the other side—is it the sea?”

“No, Miss Cathy,” I would answer; “it is hills again, just like these.”

“And what are those golden rocks like when you stand under them?” she once asked.
I detest you!”

He shrugged his shoulders: shook himself, indeed, as if his flesh crept with aversion; and thrust back his chair; while I got up, and opened my mouth, to commence a downright torrent of abuse.
But I’ll make no more ado, I’ll go boldly and look.”

Having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another key, I ran to unclose the panels, for the chamber was vacant; quickly pushing them aside, I peeped in.
Not without cause was this sentiment: Mrs. Reed looked frightened; her work had slipped from her knee; she was lifting up her hands, rocking herself to and fro, and even twisting her face as if she would cry.
Tea over and the tray removed, she again summoned us to the fire; we sat one on each side of her, and now a conversation followed between her and Helen, which it was indeed a privilege to be admitted to hear.
She would thus descend to the kitchen once a day, eat her dinner, smoke a moderate pipe on the hearth, and go back, carrying her pot of porter with her, for her private solace, in her own gloomy, upper haunt.
This I quickly was: my best dress (the silver-grey one, purchased for Miss Temple’s wedding, and never worn since) was soon put on; my hair was soon smoothed; my sole ornament, the pearl brooch, soon assumed.
“How provoking!” exclaimed Miss Ingram: “you tiresome monkey!” (apostrophising Adèle), “who perched you up in the window to give false intelligence?” and she cast on me an angry glance, as if I were in fault.
I knew Mr. Rochester had been a traveller: Mrs. Fairfax had said so; but I thought the continent of Europe had bounded his wanderings; till now I had never heard a hint given of visits to more distant shores.
I would as soon see you, Mr. Rochester, tricked out in stage-trappings, as myself clad in a court-lady’s robe; and I don’t call you handsome, sir, though I love you most dearly: far too dearly to flatter you.
Don’t you think I had better take advantage of the confession, and begin and coax and entreat—even cry and be sulky if necessary—for the sake of a mere essay of my power?”

“I dare you to any such experiment.
Presently Mr. Wood said—

“I cannot proceed without some investigation into what has been asserted, and evidence of its truth or falsehood.”

“The ceremony is quite broken off,” subjoined the voice behind us.
There are no such things as marble kisses or ice kisses, or I should say my ecclesiastical cousin’s salute belonged to one of these classes; but there may be experiment kisses, and his was an experiment kiss.
The apartment and furniture would have been nothing extraordinary as belonging to a homely, northern farmer, with a stubborn countenance, and stalwart limbs set out to advantage in knee-breeches and gaiters.
The former, when he had deposited his burden, took a critical survey of the room, and in cracked tones grated out—“Aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand thear i’ idleness un war, when all on ’ems goan out!
Wait till I get hold of those elegant locks—see if I won’t pull them a bit longer!”

“They are long enough already,” observed Master Linton, peeping from the doorway; “I wonder they don’t make his head ache.
On the succeeding morning I was laid up, and during three weeks I remained incapacitated for attending to my duties: a calamity never experienced prior to that period, and never, I am thankful to say, since.
We neither of us lay down: Catherine took her station by the lattice, and watched anxiously for morning; a deep sigh being the only answer I could obtain to my frequent entreaties that she would try to rest.
I went to the Heights as I proposed: my housekeeper entreated me to bear a little note from her to her young lady, and I did not refuse, for the worthy woman was not conscious of anything odd in her request.
She hardly raised her eyes to notice me, and continued her employment with the same disregard to common forms of politeness as before; never returning my bow and good-morning by the slightest acknowledgment.
I approached her, pretending to desire a view of the garden; and, as I fancied, adroitly dropped Mrs. Dean’s note on to her knee, unnoticed by Hareton—but she asked aloud, “What is that?” And chucked it off.
Only once, I searched through Joseph’s store of theology, to his great irritation; and once, Hareton, I came upon a secret stock in your room—some Latin and Greek, and some tales and poetry: all old friends.
It wanted but a few minutes of six, and shortly after that hour had struck, the distant roll of wheels announced the coming coach; I went to the door and watched its lamps approach rapidly through the gloom.
The new part, containing the schoolroom and dormitory, was lit by mullioned and latticed windows, which gave it a church-like aspect; a stone tablet over the door bore this inscription:—

LOWOOD INSTITUTION.
I remember it now, and I know that it was the effluence of fine intellect, of true courage; it lit up her marked lineaments, her thin face, her sunken grey eye, like a reflection from the aspect of an angel.
Well has Solomon said—“Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith.”

I would not now have exchanged Lowood with all its privations for Gateshead and its daily luxuries.
The strangest thing of all was, that not a soul in the house, except me, noticed her habits, or seemed to marvel at them: no one discussed her position or employment; no one pitied her solitude or isolation.
And I was quite right: depend on that: there are a thousand reasons why liaisons between governesses and tutors should never be tolerated a moment in any well-regulated house; firstly—”

“Oh, gracious, mama!
Both her cast of form and feature, her complexion and her general air, suggested the idea of some Israelitish princess of the patriarchal days; and such was doubtless the character she intended to represent.
Tell me what to do,—I’ll try, at least, to do it.”

“Fetch me now, Jane, a glass of wine from the dining-room: they will be at supper there; and tell me if Mason is with them, and what he is doing.”

I went.
And if that boisterous Channel, and two hundred miles or so of land come broad between us, I am afraid that cord of communion will be snapt; and then I’ve a nervous notion I should take to bleeding inwardly.
I permitted myself the delight of being kind to you; kindness stirred emotion soon: your face became soft in expression, your tones gentle; I liked my name pronounced by your lips in a grateful happy accent.
Still, I liked her almost as I liked my pupil Adèle; except that, for a child whom we have watched over and taught, a closer affection is engendered than we can give an equally attractive adult acquaintance.
Mr. Rochester continued blind the first two years of our union; perhaps it was that circumstance that drew us so very near—that knit us so very close: for I was then his vision, as I am still his right hand.
Being unable to remove the chain, I jumped over, and, running up the flagged causeway bordered with straggling gooseberry-bushes, knocked vainly for admittance, till my knuckles tingled and the dogs howled.
He turned, as he spoke, a peculiar look in her direction: a look of hatred; unless he has a most perverse set of facial muscles that will not, like those of other people, interpret the language of his soul.
“Let me go, if you want me to let you in!”

The fingers relaxed, I snatched mine through the hole, hurriedly piled the books up in a pyramid against it, and stopped my ears to exclude the lamentable prayer.
I said you must let Isabella alone!—I beg you will, unless you are tired of being received here, and wish Linton to draw the bolts against you!”

“God forbid that he should try!” answered the black villain.
He tried to wrest the key from Catherine’s grasp, and for safety she flung it into the hottest part of the fire; whereupon Mr. Edgar was taken with a nervous trembling, and his countenance grew deadly pale.
Nelly, if it be not too late, as soon as I learn how he feels, I’ll choose between these two: either to starve at once—that would be no punishment unless he had a heart—or to recover, and leave the country.
People feel with their hearts, Ellen: and since he has destroyed mine, I have not power to feel for him: and I would not, though he groaned from this to his dying day, and wept tears of blood for Catherine!
There, that is work fit for you!’

“He shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me beside Joseph, who steadily concluded his supplications, and then rose, vowing he would set off for the Grange directly.
“Is Wuthering Heights as pleasant a place as Thrushcross Grange?” he inquired, turning to take a last glance into the valley, whence a light mist mounted and formed a fleecy cloud on the skirts of the blue.
Zillah received me, and saying ‘the lad was mending nicely,’ showed me into a small, tidy, carpeted apartment, where, to my inexpressible joy, I beheld Linton laid on a little sofa, reading one of my books.
And, perhaps, not quite awake to what he did, but attracted like a child to a candle, at last he proceeded from staring to touching; he put out his hand and stroked one curl, as gently as if it were a bird.
this time she has provoked me when I could not bear it; and I’ll make her repent it for ever!”

He had his hand in her hair; Hareton attempted to release her locks, entreating him not to hurt her that once.
A child cannot quarrel with its elders, as I had done; cannot give its furious feelings uncontrolled play, as I had given mine, without experiencing afterwards the pang of remorse and the chill of reaction.
I longed to go where there was life and movement: Millcote was a large manufacturing town on the banks of the A——: a busy place enough, doubtless: so much the better; it would be a complete change at least.
It was not my habit to be disregardful of appearance or careless of the impression I made: on the contrary, I ever wished to look as well as I could, and to please as much as my want of beauty would permit.
I don’t think either summer or harvest, or winter moon, will ever shine on their revels more.”

Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and, with raised eyebrows, seemed wondering what sort of talk this was.
Somebody, unseen, rang the bell merrily; then Adèle (who had insisted on being one of her guardian’s party), bounded forward, scattering round her the contents of a basket of flowers she carried on her arm.
The sarcasm that had repelled, the harshness that had startled me once, were only like keen condiments in a choice dish: their presence was pungent, but their absence would be felt as comparatively insipid.
Here the gentlemen interposed with earnest petitions to be further enlightened on these two last-named points; but they got only blushes, ejaculations, tremors, and titters, in return for their importunity.
But since Mr. Rochester’s visit it seemed spellbound: all the night I heard but three sounds at three long intervals,—a step creak, a momentary renewal of the snarling, canine noise, and a deep human groan.
At the bottom was a sunk fence; its sole separation from lonely fields: a winding walk, bordered with laurels and terminating in a giant horse-chestnut, circled at the base by a seat, led down to the fence.
Jane, you please me, and you master me—you seem to submit, and I like the sense of pliancy you impart; and while I am twining the soft, silken skein round my finger, it sends a thrill up my arm to my heart.
More restless than ever, when I had completed these arrangements I could not sit still, nor even remain in the house: a little time-piece in the room and the old clock in the hall simultaneously struck ten.
Laws and principles are not for the times when there is no temptation: they are for such moments as this, when body and soul rise in mutiny against their rigour; stringent are they; inviolate they shall be.
What I want is, that you should write to your sisters and tell them of the fortune that has accrued to them.”

“To you, you mean.”

“I have intimated my view of the case: I am incapable of taking any other.
“You utterly misinterpret my words,” I said, at once seizing his hand: “I have no intention to grieve or pain you—indeed, I have not.”

Most bitterly he smiled—most decidedly he withdrew his hand from mine.
It fell again: the thought struck it:—

“Your master himself may be beyond the British Channel, for aught you know: and then, if he is at Thornfield Hall, towards which you hasten, who besides him is there?
Leaving Joseph to explain matters, I ran to the children’s room: their door was ajar, I saw they had never lain down, though it was past midnight; but they were calmer, and did not need me to console them.
Every object she saw, the moment she crossed the threshold, appeared to delight her; and every circumstance that took place about her: except the preparing for the burial, and the presence of the mourners.
“I do—and that won’t help me to them.”

“A good heart will help you to a bonny face, my lad,” I continued, “if you were a regular black; and a bad one will turn the bonniest into something worse than ugly.
Whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are the same; and Linton’s is as different as a moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire.”

Ere this speech ended I became sensible of Heathcliff’s presence.
That was over hours since.”

Neither of us wished to mention Heathcliff’s absence, as long as we could conceal it; so I replied, I didn’t know how she took it into her head to sit up; and she said nothing.
He expected to see me again to-morrow, and there he’ll be so disappointed: and he’ll wait for me, and I sha’n’t come!”

“Nonsense!” said I, “do you imagine he has thought as much of you as you have of him?
Next week, if you can, we’ll ride down to the Grange Park, and try mine.”

Linton did not appear to remember what she talked of and he had evidently great difficulty in sustaining any kind of conversation.
I’ll believe you are a coward, for yourself, but not a cowardly betrayer of your best friend.”

“But my father threatened me,” gasped the boy, clasping his attenuated fingers, “and I dread him—I dread him!
Hareton recoiled, looking as foolish as he could do: he sat down in the settle very quiet, and she continued turning over her volumes another half hour; finally, Earnshaw crossed over, and whispered to me.
Be quick, and bring another.”

I hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to Joseph—“The master wishes you to take him a light and rekindle the fire.” For I dared not go in myself again just then.
The steps and banisters were of oak; the staircase window was high and latticed; both it and the long gallery into which the bedroom doors opened looked as if they belonged to a church rather than a house.
She pulled out of her box, about ten minutes ago, a little pink silk frock; rapture lit her face as she unfolded it; coquetry runs in her blood, blends with her brains, and seasons the marrow of her bones.
I had taken a journey of a hundred miles to see my aunt, and I must stay with her till she was better—or dead: as to her daughters’ pride or folly, I must put it on one side, make myself independent of it.
Before I left my bed in the morning, little Adèle came running in to tell me that the great horse-chestnut at the bottom of the orchard had been struck by lightning in the night, and half of it split away.
I’ll be married in this lilac gingham: you may make a dressing-gown for yourself out of the pearl-grey silk, and an infinite series of waistcoats out of the black satin.”

He chuckled; he rubbed his hands.
Jane, leave me: go and marry Rivers.”

“Shake me off, then, sir,—push me away, for I’ll not leave you of my own accord.”

“Jane, I ever like your tone of voice: it still renews hope, it sounds so truthful.
The red cow didn’t die by chance; and your rheumatism can hardly be reckoned among providential visitations!”

“Oh, wicked, wicked!” gasped the elder; “may the Lord deliver us from evil!”

“No, reprobate!
I wouldn’t murder you to-night; unless, perhaps, I set the house on fire: but that’s as my fancy goes.”

While saying this he took a pint bottle of brandy from the dresser, and poured some into a tumbler.
The whole household need not witness the sight of your welcoming a runaway servant as a brother.”

I descended, and found Heathcliff waiting under the porch, evidently anticipating an invitation to enter.
Not so Mr. Edgar: he grew pale with pure annoyance: a feeling that reached its climax when his lady rose, and stepping across the rug, seized Heathcliff’s hands again, and laughed like one beside herself.
He was there—at least, a few yards further in the park; leant against an old ash-tree, his hat off, and his hair soaked with the dew that had gathered on the budded branches, and fell pattering round him.
He sent after me a faint ‘Catherine!’ He did not reckon on being answered so: but I wouldn’t turn back; and the morrow was the second day on which I stayed at home, nearly determined to visit him no more.
He bullied and punished me; not two or three times in the week, nor once or twice in the day, but continually: every nerve I had feared him, and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when he came near.
I felt an inexpressible relief, a soothing conviction of protection and security, when I knew that there was a stranger in the room, an individual not belonging to Gateshead, and not related to Mrs. Reed.
I was to leave Gateshead that day by a coach which passed the lodge gates at six A.M. Bessie was the only person yet risen; she had lit a fire in the nursery, where she now proceeded to make my breakfast.
My help had been needed and claimed; I had given it: I was pleased to have done something; trivial, transitory though the deed was, it was yet an active thing, and I was weary of an existence all passive.
She had, likewise, a fierce and a hard eye: it reminded me of Mrs. Reed’s; she mouthed her words in speaking; her voice was deep, its inflections very pompous, very dogmatical,—very intolerable, in short.
I wondered to see them receive with calm that look which seemed to me so penetrating: I expected their eyes to fall, their colour to rise under it; yet I was glad when I found they were in no sense moved.
Instead of wishing to shun, I longed only to dare—to divine it; and I thought Miss Ingram happy, because one day she might look into the abyss at her leisure, explore its secrets and analyse their nature.
“Let us have her in, of course.”

“To be sure,” rejoined his brother; “it would be a thousand pities to throw away such a chance of fun.”

“My dear boys, what are you thinking about?” exclaimed Mrs. Lynn.
I think because you said it with such an earnest, religious energy, and because your upward gaze at me now is the very sublime of faith, truth, and devotion: it is too much as if some spirit were near me.
He began again with a bit of a heaviness in his head the next day—that is, a fortnight sin’—and he went to sleep and niver wakened: he wor a’most stark when your brother went into t’ chamber and fand him.
“You give it up very gleefully,” said he; “I don’t quite understand your light-heartedness, because I cannot tell what employment you propose to yourself as a substitute for the one you are relinquishing.
As his sister, I might accompany him—not as his wife: I will tell him so.”

I looked towards the knoll: there he lay, still as a prostrate column; his face turned to me: his eye beaming watchful and keen.
Some say it was a just judgment on him for keeping his first marriage secret, and wanting to take another wife while he had one living: but I pity him, for my part.”

“You said he was alive?” I exclaimed.
One end, indeed, reflected splendidly both light and heat from ranks of immense pewter dishes, interspersed with silver jugs and tankards, towering row after row, on a vast oak dresser, to the very roof.
I was superstitious about dreams then, and am still; and Catherine had an unusual gloom in her aspect, that made me dread something from which I might shape a prophecy, and foresee a fearful catastrophe.
I repented having tried this second entrance, and was almost inclined to slip away before he finished cursing, but ere I could execute that intention, he ordered me in, and shut and re-fastened the door.
But you must hold your tongue about my uncle; he’s my uncle, remember; and I’ll scold papa for quarrelling with him.”

And so she ran on, till I relinquished the endeavour to convince her of her mistake.
Linton would have another, and after that another, notwithstanding my strenuous objections; and so they went on until the clock struck twelve, and we heard Hareton in the court, returning for his dinner.
“The child ought to have change of air and scene,” he added, speaking to himself; “nerves not in a good state.”

Bessie now returned; at the same moment the carriage was heard rolling up the gravel-walk.
“Little darling!—with her long curls and her blue eyes, and such a sweet colour as she has; just as if she were painted!—Bessie, I could fancy a Welsh rabbit for supper.”

“So could I—with a roast onion.
Something of vengeance I had tasted for the first time; as aromatic wine it seemed, on swallowing, warm and racy: its after-flavour, metallic and corroding, gave me a sensation as if I had been poisoned.
Ere I had gathered my wits, the classes were again seated: but as all eyes were now turned to one point, mine followed the general direction, and encountered the personage who had received me last night.
The ground was hard, the air was still, my road was lonely; I walked fast till I got warm, and then I walked slowly to enjoy and analyse the species of pleasure brooding for me in the hour and situation.
I feel sure it will work you more misery if you listen to it.”

“Not at all—it bears the most gracious message in the world: for the rest, you are not my conscience-keeper, so don’t make yourself uneasy.
“It is fair to-night,” said she, as she looked through the panes, “though not starlight; Mr. Rochester has, on the whole, had a favourable day for his journey.”

“Journey!—Is Mr. Rochester gone anywhere?
Adèle had been in a state of ecstasy all day, after hearing she was to be presented to the ladies in the evening; and it was not till Sophie commenced the operation of dressing her that she sobered down.
Then appeared the magnificent figure of Miss Ingram, clad in white, a long veil on her head, and a wreath of roses round her brow; by her side walked Mr. Rochester, and together they drew near the table.
Indeed, whatever being uttered that fearful shriek could not soon repeat it: not the widest-winged condor on the Andes could, twice in succession, send out such a yell from the cloud shrouding his eyrie.
“I know she had a particular wish to see me,” I added, “and I would not defer attending to her desire longer than is absolutely necessary.”

“Mama dislikes being disturbed in an evening,” remarked Eliza.
As I laid her down—for I raised her and supported her on my arm while she drank—I covered her ice-cold and clammy hand with mine: the feeble fingers shrank from my touch—the glazing eyes shunned my gaze.
“God keep you from harm and wrong—direct you, solace you—reward you well for your past kindness to me.”

“Little Jane’s love would have been my best reward,” he answered; “without it, my heart is broken.
And how impossible did it appear to touch the inmates of this house with concern on my behalf; to make them believe in the truth of my wants and woes—to induce them to vouchsafe a rest for my wanderings!
He was young—perhaps from twenty-eight to thirty—tall, slender; his face riveted the eye; it was like a Greek face, very pure in outline: quite a straight, classic nose; quite an Athenian mouth and chin.
I don’t wish to throw away my time and trouble on an offering you would deem worthless.”

He continued to gaze at the picture: the longer he looked, the firmer he held it, the more he seemed to covet it.
Circumstances knit themselves, fitted themselves, shot into order: the chain that had been lying hitherto a formless lump of links was drawn out straight,—every ring was perfect, the connection complete.
All my heart is yours, sir: it belongs to you; and with you it would remain, were fate to exile the rest of me from your presence for ever.”

Again, as he kissed me, painful thoughts darkened his aspect.
She expressed pleasure, too, at finding a sister among her new acquaintance; and she prattled to Catherine, and kissed her, and ran about with her, and gave her quantities of presents, at the beginning.
And then Mr. Linton, to mend matters, paid us a visit himself on the morrow, and read the young master such a lecture on the road he guided his family, that he was stirred to look about him, in earnest.
Edgar, I was defending you and yours; and I wish Heathcliff may flog you sick, for daring to think an evil thought of me!”

It did not need the medium of a flogging to produce that effect on the master.
Mr. Kenneth was fortunately just issuing from his house to see a patient in the village as I came up the street; and my account of Catherine Linton’s malady induced him to accompany me back immediately.
And there you see the distinction between our feelings: had he been in my place, and I in his, though I hated him with a hatred that turned my life to gall, I never would have raised a hand against him.
Mrs. Linton’s funeral was appointed to take place on the Friday following her decease; and till then her coffin remained uncovered, and strewn with flowers and scented leaves, in the great drawing-room.
I thought her conduct odd; and having remained alone a long while, I resolved on going and inquiring whether she were better, and asking her to come and lie on the sofa, instead of upstairs in the dark.
I let him know that his cousin would very likely sit with us, and she had been always used to see the Sabbath respected; so he had as good leave his guns and bits of indoor work alone, while she stayed.
I felt a drop or two of blood from my head trickle down my neck, and was sensible of somewhat pungent suffering: these sensations for the time predominated over fear, and I received him in frantic sort.
I wiped my tears and hushed my sobs, fearful lest any sign of violent grief might waken a preternatural voice to comfort me, or elicit from the gloom some haloed face, bending over me with strange pity.
“Ladies,” said he, turning to his family, “Miss Temple, teachers, and children, you all see this girl?”

Of course they did; for I felt their eyes directed like burning-glasses against my scorched skin.
“Miss,” said a servant who met me in the lobby, where I was wandering like a troubled spirit, “a person below wishes to see you.”

“The carrier, no doubt,” I thought, and ran downstairs without inquiry.
“Well, who is it?” she asked, in a voice and with a smile I half recognised; “you’ve not quite forgotten me, I think, Miss Jane?”

In another second I was embracing and kissing her rapturously: “Bessie!
Rochester’s.”

“Do you know Mr. Rochester?”

“No, I have never seen him.”

“He is not resident, then?”

“No.”

“Can you tell me where he is?”

“I cannot.”

“You are not a servant at the hall, of course.
Old Lord Ingram’s estates were chiefly entailed, and the eldest son came in for everything almost.”

“But I wonder no wealthy nobleman or gentleman has taken a fancy to her: Mr. Rochester, for instance.
The marble basin was removed; in its place, stood a deal table and a kitchen chair: these objects were visible by a very dim light proceeding from a horn lantern, the wax candles being all extinguished.
Then I thought of Eliza and Georgiana; I beheld one the cynosure of a ball-room, the other the inmate of a convent cell; and I dwelt on and analysed their separate peculiarities of person and character.
CHAPTER XXVI
Sophie came at seven to dress me: she was very long indeed in accomplishing her task; so long that Mr. Rochester, grown, I suppose, impatient of my delay, sent up to ask why I did not come.
“And when will you commence the exercise of your function?”

“I will go to my house to-morrow, and open the school, if you like, next week.”

“Very well: so be it.”

He rose and walked through the room.
“Jane, you will wonder at us and our mysteries,” she said, “and think us hard-hearted beings not to be more moved at the death of so near a relation as an uncle; but we have never seen him or known him.
I saw by his look, when he turned to me, that they were always written on the air between me and him; whenever I spoke, they sounded in my voice to his ear, and their echo toned every answer he gave me.
My tale draws to its close: one word respecting my experience of married life, and one brief glance at the fortunes of those whose names have most frequently recurred in this narrative, and I have done.
This writing, however, was nothing but a name repeated in all kinds of characters, large and small—Catherine Earnshaw, here and there varied to Catherine Heathcliff, and then again to Catherine Linton.
“But I’ll not do anything, though you should swear your tongue out, except what I please!”

Heathcliff lifted his hand, and the speaker sprang to a safer distance, obviously acquainted with its weight.
It was a disadvantage to the lad; for the kinder among us did not wish to fret the master, so we humoured his partiality; and that humouring was rich nourishment to the child’s pride and black tempers.
On returning, I whispered to Catherine that he had heard a good part of what she said, I was sure; and told how I saw him quit the kitchen just as she complained of her brother’s conduct regarding him.
He replied audibly enough, in a fashion which made my companion vociferate, more clamorously than before, that a wide distinction might be drawn between saints like himself and sinners like his master.
I gave a few sentences of commendation to Heathcliff, and he, either for a headache or a pang of envy, began to cry: so I got up and left him.”

“What use is it praising Heathcliff to him?” I answered.
I daresay she had been on the watch for me since morning: I saw her looking through the lattice as I came up the garden causeway, and I nodded to her; but she drew back, as if afraid of being observed.
The little one was always Cathy: it formed to him a distinction from the mother, and yet a connection with her; and his attachment sprang from its relation to her, far more than from its being his own.
He had the hypocrisy to represent a mourner: and previous to following with Hareton, he lifted the unfortunate child on to the table and muttered, with peculiar gusto, “Now, my bonny lad, you are mine!
A pale, delicate, effeminate boy, who might have been taken for my master’s younger brother, so strong was the resemblance: but there was a sickly peevishness in his aspect that Edgar Linton never had.
‘Pray let us hear you—you are grown clever!’

“He spelt, and drawled over by syllables, the name—‘Hareton Earnshaw.’

“‘And the figures?’ I cried, encouragingly, perceiving that he came to a dead halt.
Both doors and lattices were open; and yet, as is usually the case in a coal-district, a fine red fire illumined the chimney: the comfort which the eye derives from it renders the extra heat endurable.
The following evening was very wet: indeed, it poured down till day-dawn; and, as I took my morning walk round the house, I observed the master’s window swinging open, and the rain driving straight in.
Her eyes are fixed on the floor, but I am sure they do not see it—her sight seems turned in, gone down into her heart: she is looking at what she can remember, I believe; not at what is really present.
Yes, just as much good as it would do a man tired of sitting still in a “too easy chair” to take a long walk: and just as natural was the wish to stir, under my circumstances, as it would be under his.
I listened for the bell to ring below; I listened for Leah coming up with a message; I fancied sometimes I heard Mr. Rochester’s own tread, and I turned to the door, expecting it to open and admit him.
Be advised, my angel girl—and—”

“Show her into the library, of course,” cut in the “angel girl.” “It is not my mission to listen to her before the vulgar herd either: I mean to have her all to myself.
Robert Leaven resumed—

“Missis had been out of health herself for some time: she had got very stout, but was not strong with it; and the loss of money and fear of poverty were quite breaking her down.
I looked into a certain corner near, half-expecting to see the slim outline of a once dreaded switch which used to lurk there, waiting to leap out imp-like and lace my quivering palm or shrinking neck.
She did not exist: she would not be born till to-morrow, some time after eight o’clock A.M.; and I would wait to be assured she had come into the world alive before I assigned to her all that property.
There was something glad in your glance, and genial in your manner, when you conversed: I saw you had a social heart; it was the silent schoolroom—it was the tedium of your life—that made you mournful.
They have a worth—so I have always believed; and if I cannot believe it now, it is because I am insane—quite insane: with my veins running fire, and my heart beating faster than I can count its throbs.
There was no harassing restraint, no repressing of glee and vivacity with him; for with him I was at perfect ease, because I knew I suited him; all I said or did seemed either to console or revive him.
“I was in my own room, and sitting by the window, which was open: it soothed me to feel the balmy night-air; though I could see no stars and only by a vague, luminous haze, knew the presence of a moon.
“It is brief advice, but as sound as I can give.”

“Then, if you hear of me being discovered dead in a bog or a pit full of snow, your conscience won’t whisper that it is partly your fault?”

“How so?
Hindley calls him a vagabond, and won’t let him sit with us, nor eat with us any more; and, he says, he and I must not play together, and threatens to turn him out of the house if we break his orders.
One Sunday evening, it chanced that they were banished from the sitting-room, for making a noise, or a light offence of the kind; and when I went to call them to supper, I could discover them nowhere.
The household went to bed; and I, too anxious to lie down, opened my lattice and put my head out to hearken, though it rained: determined to admit them in spite of the prohibition, should they return.
She jumped up in a fine fright, flung Hareton on to the settle, and ran to seek for her friend herself; not taking leisure to consider why she was so flurried, or how her talk would have affected him.
There’s not another hoile to lig down in i’ th’ hahse!”

I was so vexed, I flung my tray and its contents on the ground; and then seated myself at the stairs’-head, hid my face in my hands, and cried.
Then the language he had held to her rankled in her heart; she who was always “love,” and “darling,” and “queen,” and “angel,” with everybody at the Grange, to be insulted so shockingly by a stranger!
No, Miss Catherine, the acquaintance must be dropped entirely: so papa expects, and I shall see that it is done.”

“But how can one little note—?” she recommenced, putting on an imploring countenance.
Though I could not but suspect, I was still surprised to discover that they were a mass of correspondence—daily almost, it must have been—from Linton Heathcliff: answers to documents forwarded by her.
And I’m obliged to come down here—they resolved never to hear me upstairs.”

“Is your father attentive to you, Master Heathcliff?” I asked, perceiving Catherine to be checked in her friendly advances.
CHAPTER XXIX
The evening after the funeral, my young lady and I were seated in the library; now musing mournfully—one of us despairingly—on our loss, now venturing conjectures as to the gloomy future.
As you hate them both, you’d not miss them: they can only be a daily plague to your unnatural heart.”

“I’m seeking a tenant for the Grange,” he answered; “and I want my children about me, to be sure.
I wouldn’t be you!”

Catherine spoke with a kind of dreary triumph: she seemed to have made up her mind to enter into the spirit of her future family, and draw pleasure from the griefs of her enemies.
“You may get your dinner with Joseph,” muttered Heathcliff, aside, “and remain in the kitchen till he is gone.”

She obeyed his directions very punctually: perhaps she had no temptation to transgress.
They have yearned towards it so long, and so unwaveringly, that I’m convinced it will be reached—and soon—because it has devoured my existence: I am swallowed up in the anticipation of its fulfilment.
At the close of the afternoon service we returned by an exposed and hilly road, where the bitter winter wind, blowing over a range of snowy summits to the north, almost flayed the skin from our faces.
The charm of adventure sweetens that sensation, the glow of pride warms it; but then the throb of fear disturbs it; and fear with me became predominant when half-an-hour elapsed and still I was alone.
put the drawings away!”

I had scarce tied the strings of the portfolio, when, looking at his watch, he said abruptly—

“It is nine o’clock: what are you about, Miss Eyre, to let Adèle sit up so long?
It was one afternoon, when he chanced to meet me and Adèle in the grounds: and while she played with Pilot and her shuttlecock, he asked me to walk up and down a long beech avenue within sight of her.
Threading this chaos, I at last reached the larder; there I took possession of a cold chicken, a roll of bread, some tarts, a plate or two and a knife and fork: with this booty I made a hasty retreat.
we’ll talk over the voyage and the parting quietly half-an-hour or so, while the stars enter into their shining life up in heaven yonder: here is the chestnut tree: here is the bench at its old roots.
I only entertained the intention for a moment; for, not being insane, the crisis of exquisite and unalloyed despair, which had originated the wish and design of self-destruction, was past in a second.
You too have principle and mind: your tastes and habits resemble Diana’s and Mary’s; your presence is always agreeable to me; in your conversation I have already for some time found a salutary solace.
I had previously taken a journey to S—— to purchase some new furniture: my cousins having given me carte blanche to effect what alterations I pleased, and a sum having been set aside for that purpose.
When Diana and Mary returned, the former found her scholar transferred from her to her brother: she laughed, and both she and Mary agreed that St. John should never have persuaded them to such a step.
All is still: he again advances: he bends above her; a light veil rests on her features: he lifts it, bends lower; now his eyes anticipate the vision of beauty—warm, and blooming, and lovely, in rest.
I’ve said I did not love her, and rather relished mortifying her vanity now and then: besides, she hurt me extremely; so I started up from my knees, and screamed out, “Oh, Miss, that’s a nasty trick!
“And so do I. I’ve dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed with me ever after, and changed my ideas: they’ve gone through and through me, like wine through water, and altered the colour of my mind.
He does not know what being in love is!”

“I see no reason that he should not know, as well as you,” I returned; “and if you are his choice, he’ll be the most unfortunate creature that ever was born!
“If I can make any sense of your nonsense, Miss,” I said, “it only goes to convince me that you are ignorant of the duties you undertake in marrying; or else that you are a wicked, unprincipled girl.
“On what occasion?”

“In our walk along the moor: you told me to ramble where I pleased, while you sauntered on with Mr. Heathcliff!”

“And that’s your notion of harshness?” said Catherine, laughing.
“I love him more than ever you loved Edgar, and he might love me, if you would let him!”

“I wouldn’t be you for a kingdom, then!” Catherine declared, emphatically: and she seemed to speak sincerely.
I wasted no condolences on Miss, nor any expostulations on my mistress; nor did I pay much attention to the sighs of my master, who yearned to hear his lady’s name, since he might not hear her voice.
Catherine lay in a troubled sleep: her husband had succeeded in soothing the excess of frenzy; he now hung over her pillow, watching every shade and every change of her painfully expressive features.
An unexpected aid presently appeared in the shape of Throttler, whom I now recognised as a son of our old Skulker: it had spent its whelphood at the Grange, and was given by my father to Mr. Hindley.
At a most miserable period of my life, I had a notion of the kind: it haunted me on my return to the neighbourhood last summer; but only her own assurance could make me admit the horrible idea again.
Is he your son?”

She pointed to Hareton, the other individual, who had gained nothing but increased bulk and strength by the addition of two years to his age: he seemed as awkward and rough as ever.
Joseph seemed sitting in a sort of elysium alone, beside a roaring fire; a quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with large pieces of toasted oat-cake; and his black, short pipe in his mouth.
He had bequeathed the whole of his, and what had been her, moveable property, to his father: the poor creature was threatened, or coaxed, into that act during her week’s absence, when his uncle died.
I hasped the window; I combed his black long hair from his forehead; I tried to close his eyes: to extinguish, if possible, that frightful, life-like gaze of exultation before any one else beheld it.
It may hate him who dares to scrutinise and expose—to rase the gilding, and show base metal under it—to penetrate the sepulchre, and reveal charnel relics: but hate as it will, it is indebted to him.
Ev’n should I fall o’er the broken bridge passing,
    Or stray in the marshes, by false lights beguiled,
Still will my Father, with promise and blessing,
    Take to His bosom the poor orphan child.
“And, ma’am,” he continued, “the laundress tells me some of the girls have two clean tuckers in the week: it is too much; the rules limit them to one.”

“I think I can explain that circumstance, sir.
I saw the outline of a form under the clothes, but the face was hid by the hangings: the nurse I had spoken to in the garden sat in an easy-chair asleep; an unsnuffed candle burnt dimly on the table.
I recognised his decisive nose, more remarkable for character than beauty; his full nostrils, denoting, I thought, choler; his grim mouth, chin, and jaw—yes, all three were very grim, and no mistake.
However, my tenderest feelings are about to receive a shock: such is my presentiment; stay now, to see whether it will be realised.”

Ere long, Adèle’s little foot was heard tripping across the hall.
All in that region was fire and commotion; the soup and fish were in the last stage of projection, and the cook hung over her crucibles in a frame of mind and body threatening spontaneous combustion.
All eyes met her with a glance of eager curiosity, and she met all eyes with one of rebuff and coldness; she looked neither flurried nor merry: she walked stiffly to her seat, and took it in silence.
There was stretched Sarah Reed’s once robust and active frame, rigid and still: her eye of flint was covered with its cold lid; her brow and strong traits wore yet the impress of her inexorable soul.
You were from home last night?”

“I was: I know that; and you hinted a while ago at something which had happened in my absence:—nothing, probably, of consequence; but, in short, it has disturbed you.
At this moment I discover that I forgot to take my parcel out of the pocket of the coach, where I had placed it for safety; there it remains, there it must remain; and now, I am absolutely destitute.
“That is strong,” she said, when she had finished: “I relish it.” The other girl, who had lifted her head to listen to her sister, repeated, while she gazed at the fire, a line of what had been read.
Till this moment, I had been so intent on watching them, their appearance and conversation had excited in me so keen an interest, I had half-forgotten my own wretched position: now it recurred to me.
They would whisper sentences of this sort at my bedside—

“It is very well we took her in.”

“Yes; she would certainly have been found dead at the door in the morning had she been left out all night.
Her salary will be thirty pounds a year: her house is already furnished, very simply, but sufficiently, by the kindness of a lady, Miss Oliver; the only daughter of the sole rich man in my parish—Mr.
“Well?”

“It puzzles me to know why Mr. Briggs wrote to you about me; or how he knew you, or could fancy that you, living in such an out-of-the-way place, had the power to aid in my discovery.”

“Oh!
My dear cousin, abandon your scheme of marriage—forget it.”

“No,” said he; “it is a long-cherished scheme, and the only one which can secure my great end: but I shall urge you no further at present.
With you I would have ventured much, because I admire, confide in, and, as a sister, I love you; but I am convinced that, go when and with whom I would, I should not live long in that climate.”

“Ah!
To-morrow, I fear I shall find her no more.”

A commonplace, practical reply, out of the train of his own disturbed ideas, was, I was sure, the best and most reassuring for him in this frame of mind.
By the bye, I must mind not to rise on your hearth with only a glass of water then: I must bring an egg at the least, to say nothing of fried ham.”

“You mocking changeling—fairy-born and human-bred!
“You are the proper person to ask me.”

She flung the tea back, spoon and all, and resumed her chair in a pet; her forehead corrugated, and her red under-lip pushed out, like a child’s ready to cry.
He stood by the fire, his back towards me, just finishing a stormy scene with poor Zillah; who ever and anon interrupted her labour to pluck up the corner of her apron, and heave an indignant groan.
In play, she liked exceedingly to act the little mistress; using her hands freely, and commanding her companions: she did so to me, but I would not bear slapping and ordering; and so I let her know.
The lass said nothing to her father, but she told it all over Gimmerton this morning.”

I ran and peeped, for form’s sake, into Isabella’s room; confirming, when I returned, the servant’s statement.
I cannot live without my soul!”

He dashed his head against the knotted trunk; and, lifting up his eyes, howled, not like a man, but like a savage beast being goaded to death with knives and spears.
I happened to leave him ten minutes yesterday afternoon, and in that interval he fastened the two doors of the house against me, and he has spent the night in drinking himself to death deliberately!
The abrupt descent of Penistone Crags particularly attracted her notice; especially when the setting sun shone on it and the topmost heights, and the whole extent of landscape besides lay in shadow.
I believe the master would relish Earnshaw’s thrashing him to a mummy, if he were not his son; and I’m certain he would be fit to turn him out of doors, if he knew half the nursing he gives hisseln.
Your courage is well disguised: you seem damnably afraid!”

“I am afraid now,” she replied, “because, if I stay, papa will be miserable: and how can I endure making him miserable—when he—when he—Mr.
Once or twice, after we had gone to bed, I’ve happened to open my door again and seen her sitting crying on the stairs’-top; and then I’ve shut myself in quick, for fear of being moved to interfere.
“I shall connect them with you, and hate them.”

She opened one that had obviously been often turned over, and read a portion in the drawling tone of a beginner; then laughed, and threw it from her.
The two new friends established themselves in the house during his absence; where I heard Hareton sternly check his cousin, on her offering a revelation of her father-in-law’s conduct to his father.
With Hareton the resemblance is carried farther: it is singular at all times, then it was particularly striking; because his senses were alert, and his mental faculties wakened to unwonted activity.
I heard the name of Mr. Brocklehurst pronounced by some lips; at which Miss Miller shook her head disapprovingly; but she made no great effort to check the general wrath; doubtless she shared in it.
She had a turn for narrative, I for analysis; she liked to inform, I to question; so we got on swimmingly together, deriving much entertainment, if not much improvement, from our mutual intercourse.
The succeeding week seemed long: it came to an end at last, however, like all sublunary things, and once more, towards the close of a pleasant autumn day, I found myself afoot on the road to Lowton.
Various duties awaited me on my arrival: I had to sit with the girls during their hour of study; then it was my turn to read prayers; to see them to bed: afterwards I supped with the other teachers.
I should not wonder but she has saved enough to keep her independent if she liked to leave; but I suppose she’s got used to the place; and then she’s not forty yet, and strong and able for anything.
“Ah!—she understands what she has to do,—nobody better,” rejoined Leah significantly; “and it is not every one could fill her shoes—not for all the money she gets.”

“That it is not!” was the reply.
“Indeed, mama, but you can—and will,” pronounced the haughty voice of Blanche, as she turned round on the piano-stool; where till now she had sat silent, apparently examining sundry sheets of music.
On repairing thither, I found a man waiting for me, having the appearance of a gentleman’s servant: he was dressed in deep mourning, and the hat he held in his hand was surrounded with a crape band.
I had heard from Mrs. Fairfax in the interim of my absence: the party at the hall was dispersed; Mr. Rochester had left for London three weeks ago, but he was then expected to return in a fortnight.
And one could cut a pretty enough scarf out of a rainbow.”

“She is far better as she is,” concluded Adèle, after musing some time: “besides, she would get tired of living with only you in the moon.
No sooner had twilight, that hour of romance, began to lower her blue and starry banner over the lattice, than I rose, opened the piano, and entreated him, for the love of heaven, to give me a song.
You say you never heard of a Mrs. Rochester at the house up yonder, Wood; but I daresay you have many a time inclined your ear to gossip about the mysterious lunatic kept there under watch and ward.
Glad was I when I at last got her to Thornfield, and saw her safely lodged in that third-storey room, of whose secret inner cabinet she has now for ten years made a wild beast’s den—a goblin’s cell.
Of yourself you could come with soft flight and nestle against my heart, if you would: seized against your will, you will elude the grasp like an essence—you will vanish ere I inhale your fragrance.
I know poetry is not dead, nor genius lost; nor has Mammon gained power over either, to bind or slay: they will both assert their existence, their presence, their liberty and strength again one day.
When given, he viewed me to learn the result; it was not striking: I am sure I did not blush; perhaps I might have turned a little pale, for I felt as if this kiss were a seal affixed to my fetters.
The front was, as I had once seen it in a dream, but a shell-like wall, very high and very fragile-looking, perforated with paneless windows: no roof, no battlements, no chimneys—all had crashed in.
The latter had never been under-drawn: its entire anatomy lay bare to an inquiring eye, except where a frame of wood laden with oatcakes and clusters of legs of beef, mutton, and ham, concealed it.
Heathcliff, your wife, I mean.”

“Well, yes—oh, you would intimate that her spirit has taken the post of ministering angel, and guards the fortunes of Wuthering Heights, even when her body is gone.
“My name is Hareton Earnshaw,” growled the other; “and I’d counsel you to respect it!”

“I’ve shown no disrespect,” was my reply, laughing internally at the dignity with which he announced himself.
Then the doctor had said that she would not bear crossing much; she ought to have her own way; and it was nothing less than murder in her eyes for any one to presume to stand up and contradict her.
It is right to establish a good understanding at the beginning.”

I approached, and, attempting to take his chubby fist, said—“How do you do, my dear?”

He replied in a jargon I did not comprehend.
Her present countenance had a wild vindictiveness in its white cheek, and a bloodless lip and scintillating eye; and she retained in her closed fingers a portion of the locks she had been grasping.
I did not feel as if I were in the company of a creature of my own species: it appeared that he would not understand, though I spoke to him; so I stood off, and held my tongue, in great perplexity.
In winter the frost is always there before it comes to us; and deep into summer I have found snow under that black hollow on the north-east side!”

“Oh, you have been on them!” she cried gleefully.
One was marked C., and the other H.; I wished to have the C., because that stood for Catherine, and the H. might be for Heathcliff, his name; but the bran came out of H., and Linton didn’t like it.
Hareton is gone with some cattle to the Lees, and Zillah and Joseph are off on a journey of pleasure; and, though I’m used to being alone, I’d rather have some interesting company, if I can get it.
He talked now, freely enough; and she presently saw fit to retreat to her solitude: but the frost had set in, and, in spite of her pride, she was forced to condescend to our company, more and more.
The lattice, flapping to and fro, had grazed one hand that rested on the sill; no blood trickled from the broken skin, and when I put my fingers to it, I could doubt no more: he was dead and stark!
All John Reed’s violent tyrannies, all his sisters’ proud indifference, all his mother’s aversion, all the servants’ partiality, turned up in my disturbed mind like a dark deposit in a turbid well.
Fearful, however, of losing this first and only opportunity of relieving my grief by imparting it, I, after a disturbed pause, contrived to frame a meagre, though, as far as it went, true response.
The refreshing meal, the brilliant fire, the presence and kindness of her beloved instructress, or, perhaps, more than all these, something in her own unique mind, had roused her powers within her.
Mobile and flexible, it was never intended to be compressed in the eternal silence of solitude: it is a mouth which should speak much and smile often, and have human affection for its interlocutor.
“Concealing the mad-woman’s neighbourhood from you, however, was something like covering a child with a cloak and laying it down near a upas-tree: that demon’s vicinage is poisoned, and always was.
A mile off, beyond the fields, lay a road which stretched in the contrary direction to Millcote; a road I had never travelled, but often noticed, and wondered where it led: thither I bent my steps.
Give it me, and a piece of bread.”

Diana (I knew her by the long curls which I saw drooping between me and the fire as she bent over me) broke some bread, dipped it in milk, and put it to my lips.
It may be of no moment to you; you have sisters and don’t care for a cousin; but I had nobody; and now three relations,—or two, if you don’t choose to be counted,—are born into my world full-grown.
How I looked while these ideas were taking my spirit by storm, I cannot tell; but I perceived soon that Mr. Rivers had placed a chair behind me, and was gently attempting to make me sit down on it.
Mr. Heathcliff and his man climbed the cellar steps with vexatious phlegm: I don’t think they moved one second faster than usual, though the hearth was an absolute tempest of worrying and yelping.
“And who is to look after the horses, eh?”

“A man’s life is of more consequence than one evening’s neglect of the horses: somebody must go,” murmured Mrs. Heathcliff, more kindly than I expected.
“If you set store on him, you’d better be quiet.”

“Then I hope his ghost will haunt you; and I hope Mr. Heathcliff will never get another tenant till the Grange is a ruin,” she answered, sharply.
Miss Cathy’s riven th’ back off “Th’ Helmet o’ Salvation,” un’ Heathcliff’s pawsed his fit into t’ first part o’ “T’ Brooad Way to Destruction!” It’s fair flaysome that ye let ’em go on this gait.
don’t repeat that horrid noise: nothing could excuse it, unless you were having your throat cut!”

“If the little fiend had got in at the window, she probably would have strangled me!” I returned.
We searched the house, above and below, and the yard and stables; they were invisible: and, at last, Hindley in a passion told us to bolt the doors, and swore nobody should let them in that night.
A half-civilised ferocity lurked yet in the depressed brows and eyes full of black fire, but it was subdued; and his manner was even dignified: quite divested of roughness, though stern for grace.
Mr. Linton, I’m mortally sorry that you are not worth knocking down!”

My master glanced towards the passage, and signed me to fetch the men: he had no intention of hazarding a personal encounter.
Afterwards, she refused to eat, and now she alternately raves and remains in a half dream; knowing those about her, but having her mind filled with all sorts of strange ideas and illusions.”

“Mr.
I’m wearying to escape into that glorious world, and to be always there: not seeing it dimly through tears, and yearning for it through the walls of an aching heart: but really with it, and in it.
“Gone to heaven, I hope; where we may, every one, join her, if we take due warning and leave our evil ways to follow good!”

“Did she take due warning, then?” asked Heathcliff, attempting a sneer.
Joseph affirms he’s sure he’s an altered man: that the Lord has touched his heart, and he is saved ‘so as by fire.’ I’m puzzled to detect signs of the favourable change: but it is not my business.
“But Maister Hareton nivir ate naught else, when he wer a little ’un; and what wer gooid enough for him’s gooid enough for ye, I’s rayther think!”

“I sha’n’t eat it!” answered Linton, snappishly.
Compare the present occasion with such an affliction as that, and be thankful for the friends you have, instead of coveting more.”

“I’m not crying for myself, Ellen,” she answered, “it’s for him.
“Hareton and I are friends now; and I shall tell him all about you!”

The master seemed confounded a moment: he grew pale, and rose up, eyeing her all the while, with an expression of mortal hate.
His honest, warm, and intelligent nature shook off rapidly the clouds of ignorance and degradation in which it had been bred; and Catherine’s sincere commendations acted as a spur to his industry.
Are you fond of it?”

“I like Revelations, and the book of Daniel, and Genesis and Samuel, and a little bit of Exodus, and some parts of Kings and Chronicles, and Job and Jonah.”

“And the Psalms?
The fact is, after my conflict with and victory over Mrs. Reed, I was not disposed to care much for the nursemaid’s transitory anger; and I was disposed to bask in her youthful lightness of heart.
Such was the characteristic of Helen’s discourse on that, to me, memorable evening; her spirit seemed hastening to live within a very brief span as much as many live during a protracted existence.
Leah, make a little hot negus and cut a sandwich or two: here are the keys of the storeroom.”

And she produced from her pocket a most housewifely bunch of keys, and delivered them to the servant.
While you looked so, I should be certain that whatever charter you might grant under coercion, your first act, when released, would be to violate its conditions.”

“Why, Jane, what would you have?
“Well, I have been waiting for you long, and listening: yet not one movement have I heard, nor one sob: five minutes more of that death-like hush, and I should have forced the lock like a burglar.
At first I did not know to what room he had borne me; all was cloudy to my glazed sight: presently I felt the reviving warmth of a fire; for, summer as it was, I had become icy cold in my chamber.
Let me try to wait His will in silence.”

These words I not only thought, but uttered; and thrusting back all my misery into my heart, I made an effort to compel it to remain there—dumb and still.
Your dog is quicker to recognise his friends than you are, sir; he pricked his ears and wagged his tail when I was at the bottom of the field, and you have your back towards me now.”

It was true.
“I scarcely expected to hear that expression from you,” he said: “I think I have done and uttered nothing to deserve scorn.”

I was touched by his gentle tone, and overawed by his high, calm mien.
A peep, and then a long stare; and then a departure from my niche and a straying out into the meadow; and a sudden stop full in front of the great mansion, and a protracted, hardy gaze towards it.
I led him out of the wet and wild wood into some cheerful fields: I described to him how brilliantly green they were; how the flowers and hedges looked refreshed; how sparklingly blue was the sky.
“Shake hands, Heathcliff,” said Mr. Earnshaw, condescendingly; “once in a way that is permitted.”

“I shall not,” replied the boy, finding his tongue at last; “I shall not stand to be laughed at.
It looks as if you envied her, because she is more thought of than you.”

The notion of envying Catherine was incomprehensible to him, but the notion of grieving her he understood clearly enough.
He flung himself into the nearest seat, and on my approaching hurriedly to ascertain if she had fainted, he gnashed at me, and foamed like a mad dog, and gathered her to him with greedy jealousy.
I’ve done my duty.’

“With that I shut the window and returned to my place by the fire; having too small a stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any anxiety for the danger that menaced him.
He was about to enlarge further, but the two youngsters broke into a noisy fit of merriment: my giddy miss being delighted to discover that she might turn his strange talk to matter of amusement.
Having sat till she was warm, she began to look round, and discovered a number of books on the dresser; she was instantly upon her feet again, stretching to reach them: but they were too high up.
Side out o’ t’ gate, now, this minute!”

Catherine frowned, and retreated to the window-seat chewing her lip, and endeavouring, by humming an eccentric tune, to conceal a growing tendency to sob.
I hed aimed to dee wheare I’d sarved fur sixty year; and I thowt I’d lug my books up into t’ garret, and all my bits o’ stuff, and they sud hev’ t’ kitchen to theirseln; for t’ sake o’ quietness.
Hareton, with a streaming face, dug green sods, and laid them over the brown mould himself: at present it is as smooth and verdant as its companion mounds—and I hope its tenant sleeps as soundly.
There was a light in the porter’s lodge: when we reached it, we found the porter’s wife just kindling her fire: my trunk, which had been carried down the evening before, stood corded at the door.
CHAPTER VI
The next day commenced as before, getting up and dressing by rushlight; but this morning we were obliged to dispense with the ceremony of washing; the water in the pitchers was frozen.
At last, having held a document before her glasses for nearly five minutes, she presented it across the counter, accompanying the act by another inquisitive and mistrustful glance—it was for J.E.
If he was absent from the room an hour, a perceptible dulness seemed to steal over the spirits of his guests; and his re-entrance was sure to give a fresh impulse to the vivacity of conversation.
She wanted to know if I was happy at Thornfield Hall, and what sort of a person the mistress was; and when I told her there was only a master, whether he was a nice gentleman, and if I liked him.
I had often been unwilling to look at my master, because I feared he could not be pleased at my look; but I was sure I might lift my face to his now, and not cool his affection by its expression.
In a day or two I hope to pour them into your lap: for every privilege, every attention shall be yours that I would accord a peer’s daughter, if about to marry her.”

“Oh, sir!—never rain jewels!
You open your eyes like an eager bird, and make every now and then a restless movement, as if answers in speech did not flow fast enough for you, and you wanted to read the tablet of one’s heart.
And now, sir, to reward you for the accurate guess, I will promise to paint you a careful and faithful duplicate of this very picture, provided you admit that the gift would be acceptable to you.
Lockwood,” he added, “you may go into my room: you’ll only be in the way, coming downstairs so early: and your childish outcry has sent sleep to the devil for me.”

“And for me, too,” I replied.
We were both of us nodding ere any one invaded our retreat, and then it was Joseph, shuffling down a wooden ladder that vanished in the roof, through a trap: the ascent to his garret, I suppose.
When we got to Wuthering Heights, there he stood at the front door; and, as I passed in, I asked, “how was the baby?”

“Nearly ready to run about, Nell!” he replied, putting on a cheerful smile.
they are instruments that will do execution—you must beware of your eyes.”

“I’d wrench them off her fingers, if they ever menaced me,” he answered, brutally, when the door had closed after her.
Mr. Linton summoned me, and with great difficulty, and after resorting to many means, we managed to restore her to sensation; but she was all bewildered; she sighed, and moaned, and knew nobody.
And from what I heard, Joseph contributed much to his deterioration, by a narrow-minded partiality which prompted him to flatter and pet him, as a boy, because he was the head of the old family.
You’ll get home earlier for the ease; and you shall receive a kind welcome.”

I whispered Catherine that she mustn’t, on any account, accede to the proposal: it was entirely out of the question.
She appeared so deeply impressed and shocked at this new view of human nature—excluded from all her studies and all her ideas till now—that Mr. Edgar deemed it unnecessary to pursue the subject.
“Hareton, is it you he’s finding fault with?”

“I’ve pulled up two or three bushes,” replied the young man; “but I’m going to set ’em again.”

“And why have you pulled them up?” said the master.
“My feet they are sore, and my limbs they are weary;
    Long is the way, and the mountains are wild;
Soon will the twilight close moonless and dreary
    Over the path of the poor orphan child.
benefactress!” said I inwardly: “they all call Mrs. Reed my benefactress; if so, a benefactress is a disagreeable thing.”

“Do you say your prayers night and morning?” continued my interrogator.
“C’est là ma gouvernante!” said she, pointing to me, and addressing her nurse; who answered—

“Mais oui, certainement.”

“Are they foreigners?” I inquired, amazed at hearing the French language.
“On to the leads; will you come and see the view from thence?” I followed still, up a very narrow staircase to the attics, and thence by a ladder and through a trap-door to the roof of the hall.
Next morning I had the pleasure of encountering him; left a bullet in one of his poor etiolated arms, feeble as the wing of a chicken in the pip, and then thought I had done with the whole crew.
You will not exclude me from your confidence if you admit me to your heart?”

“You are welcome to all my confidence that is worth having, Jane; but for God’s sake, don’t desire a useless burden!
I’ll have no brats!—I’ll have only you.”

“Do let her go, Mr. Rochester, if you please: it would be better.”

“Not it: she will be a restraint.”

He was quite peremptory, both in look and voice.
I shut the closet to conceal the strange, wraith-like apparel it contained; which, at this evening hour—nine o’clock—gave out certainly a most ghostly shimmer through the shadow of my apartment.
I had some fear—or hope—that here I should die: but I was soon up; crawling forwards on my hands and knees, and then again raised to my feet—as eager and as determined as ever to reach the road.
The aperture was so screened and narrow, that curtain or shutter had been deemed unnecessary; and when I stooped down and put aside the spray of foliage shooting over it, I could see all within.
The rapidity of their progress, in some instances, was even surprising; and an honest and happy pride I took in it: besides, I began personally to like some of the best girls; and they liked me.
The translation of a few pages of German occupied an hour; then I got my palette and pencils, and fell to the more soothing, because easier occupation, of completing Rosamond Oliver’s miniature.
The air of the moors, the freedom of home, the dawn of prosperity, acted on Diana and Mary’s spirits like some life-giving elixir: they were gay from morning till noon, and from noon till night.
Having no desire to be entertained by a cat-and-dog combat, I stepped forward briskly, as if eager to partake the warmth of the hearth, and innocent of any knowledge of the interrupted dispute.
I incautiously gave the account aloud, and she heard me; for she started up—her hair flying over her shoulders, her eyes flashing, the muscles of her neck and arms standing out preternaturally.
He saw I knew nought about it, and he told how a gentleman and lady had stopped to have a horse’s shoe fastened at a blacksmith’s shop, two miles out of Gimmerton, not very long after midnight!
By evening she seemed greatly exhausted; yet no arguments could persuade her to return to that apartment, and I had to arrange the parlour sofa for her bed, till another room could be prepared.
“But papa says you would love me better than him and all the world, if you were my wife; so I’d rather you were that.”

“No, I should never love anybody better than papa,” she returned gravely.
I, for my part, began to fancy my forebodings were false, and that he must be actually rallying, when he mentioned riding and walking on the moors, and seemed so earnest in pursuing his object.
I uttered as little as possible against Linton; nor did I describe all his father’s brutal conduct—my intentions being to add no bitterness, if I could help it, to his already over-flowing cup.
Neither Bessie nor any one else will go into it at night, if they can help it; and it was cruel to shut me up alone without a candle,—so cruel that I think I shall never forget it.”

“Nonsense!
I feared to return to the nursery, and feared to go forward to the parlour; ten minutes I stood in agitated hesitation; the vehement ringing of the breakfast-room bell decided me; I must enter.
I had risen half-an-hour before her entrance, and had washed my face, and put on my clothes by the light of a half-moon just setting, whose rays streamed through the narrow window near my crib.
Rain, wind, and darkness filled the air; nevertheless, I dimly discerned a wall before me and a door open in it; through this door I passed with my new guide: she shut and locked it behind her.
Now, mine continually rove away; when I should be listening to Miss Scatcherd, and collecting all she says with assiduity, often I lose the very sound of her voice; I fall into a sort of dream.
A long stride measured the schoolroom, and presently beside Miss Temple, who herself had risen, stood the same black column which had frowned on me so ominously from the hearthrug of Gateshead.
This pale crescent was “the likeness of a kingly crown;” what it diademed was “the shape which shape had none.”

“Were you happy when you painted these pictures?” asked Mr. Rochester presently.
In your room?—Jane, run down to Mr. Mason’s room,—the one next mine,—and fetch a cloak you will see there.”

Again I ran, and again returned, bearing an immense mantle lined and edged with fur.
There are times when, for your sake, I have been a little uneasy at his marked preference, and have wished to put you on your guard: but I did not like to suggest even the possibility of wrong.
At that moment I saw the reflection of the visage and features quite distinctly in the dark oblong glass.”

“And how were they?”

“Fearful and ghastly to me—oh, sir, I never saw a face like it!
While I picked the fruit, and she made the paste for the pies, she proceeded to give me sundry details about her deceased master and mistress, and “the childer,” as she called the young people.
Surely—”

I stopped: I could not trust myself to entertain, much less to express, the thought that rushed upon me—that embodied itself,—that, in a second, stood out a strong, solid probability.
He deferred his departure a whole week, and during that time he made me feel what severe punishment a good yet stern, a conscientious yet implacable man can inflict on one who has offended him.
To her hurried “Is it really you, miss, come at this late hour to this lonely place?” I answered by taking her hand; and then I followed her into the kitchen, where John now sat by a good fire.
Then it grew dark; she would have had them to bed, but they begged sadly to be allowed to stay up; and, just about eleven o’clock, the door-latch was raised quietly, and in stepped the master.
It racked me to recall past happiness and the greater peril there was of conjuring up its apparition, the quicker the thible ran round, and the faster the handfuls of meal fell into the water.
It is not in him to be loved like me: how can she love in him what he has not?”

“Catherine and Edgar are as fond of each other as any two people can be,” cried Isabella, with sudden vivacity.
And would it not be foolish to mourn a calamity above twenty years beforehand?”

“But Aunt Isabella was younger than papa,” she remarked, gazing up with timid hope to seek further consolation.
“To see him, I should say, that instead of rambling with his sweetheart on the hills, he ought to be in bed, under the hands of a doctor.”

“He shall be, in a day or two,” muttered Heathcliff.
Yet distant and soft the night breeze is blowing,
    Clouds there are none, and clear stars beam mild,
God, in His mercy, protection is showing,
    Comfort and hope to the poor orphan child.
The indefatigable bell now sounded for the fourth time: the classes were marshalled and marched into another room to breakfast: how glad I was to behold a prospect of getting something to eat!
It was quite at the other end of the house; but I knew my way; and the light of the unclouded summer moon, entering here and there at passage windows, enabled me to find it without difficulty.
My eye passed all other objects to rest on those most remote, the blue peaks; it was those I longed to surmount; all within their boundary of rock and heath seemed prison-ground, exile limits.
Can you play on the piano?”

“A little.”

There was one in the room; Bessie went and opened it, and then asked me to sit down and give her a tune: I played a waltz or two, and she was charmed.
Nothing ever rode the Gytrash: it was always alone; and goblins, to my notions, though they might tenant the dumb carcasses of beasts, could scarce covet shelter in the commonplace human form.
I let Mrs. Fairfax precede me into the dining-room, and kept in her shade as we crossed that apartment; and, passing the arch, whose curtain was now dropped, entered the elegant recess beyond.
“No, sir,” I answered; “but there has been a fire: get up, do; you are quenched now; I will fetch you a candle.”

“In the name of all the elves in Christendom, is that Jane Eyre?” he demanded.
At first I could not make much sense of what I heard; for the discourse of Louisa Eshton and Mary Ingram, who sat nearer to me, confused the fragmentary sentences that reached me at intervals.
They affirmed that she had even divined their thoughts, and had whispered in the ear of each the name of the person she liked best in the world, and informed them of what they most wished for.
Mr. Rochester held the candle over him; I recognised in his pale and seemingly lifeless face—the stranger, Mason: I saw too that his linen on one side, and one arm, was almost soaked in blood.
Providence has blessed my endeavours to secure a competency; and as I am unmarried and childless, I wish to adopt her during my life, and bequeath her at my death whatever I may have to leave.
Her occupation, suspended by Mr. Rochester’s announcement, seemed now forgotten: her eyes, fixed on the blank wall opposite, expressed the surprise of a quiet mind stirred by unwonted tidings.
Why, the day is already commenced which is to bind us indissolubly; and when we are once united, there shall be no recurrence of these mental terrors: I guarantee that.”

“Mental terrors, sir!
“Look at yourself in the mirror: you have not taken one peep.”

So I turned at the door: I saw a robed and veiled figure, so unlike my usual self that it seemed almost the image of a stranger.
“Delay an instant: lean on me, Jane.”

And now I can recall the picture of the grey old house of God rising calm before me, of a rook wheeling round the steeple, of a ruddy morning sky beyond.
He could not then hasten to England himself, to extricate you from the snare into which you had fallen, but he implored Mr. Mason to lose no time in taking steps to prevent the false marriage.
It is a summer evening; the coachman has set me down at a place called Whitcross; he could take me no farther for the sum I had given, and I was not possessed of another shilling in the world.
I said my evening prayers
Beside the crag the heath was very deep: when I lay down my feet were buried in it; rising high on each side, it left only a narrow space for the night-air to invade.
I grew impatient: a restless movement or two, and an eager and exacting glance fastened on his face, conveyed the feeling to him as effectually as words could have done, and with less trouble.
I, who preached contentment with a humble lot, and justified the vocation even of hewers of wood and drawers of water in God’s service—I, His ordained minister, almost rave in my restlessness.
“But where is the use of going on,” I asked, “when you are probably preparing some iron blow of contradiction, or forging a fresh chain to fetter your heart?”

“Don’t imagine such hard things.
No; it was St. John Rivers, who, lifting the latch, came in out of the frozen hurricane—the howling darkness—and stood before me: the cloak that covered his tall figure all white as a glacier.
She had left Thornfield Hall in the night; every research after her course had been vain: the country had been scoured far and wide; no vestige of information could be gathered respecting her.
All men of talent, whether they be men of feeling or not; whether they be zealots, or aspirants, or despots—provided only they be sincere—have their sublime moments, when they subdue and rule.
I have worn it since the day I lost my only treasure, as a memento of her.”

“We will go home through the wood: that will be the shadiest way.”

He pursued his own thoughts without heeding me.
I know no weariness of my Edward’s society: he knows none of mine, any more than we each do of the pulsation of the heart that beats in our separate bosoms; consequently, we are ever together.
Mr. Earnshaw snatched up the culprit directly and conveyed him to his chamber; where, doubtless, he administered a rough remedy to cool the fit of passion, for he appeared red and breathless.
Mr. Heathcliff was nowhere visible; and Joseph, whom I followed to the stables, and requested to accompany me in, after staring and muttering to himself, screwed up his nose and replied—“Mim!
I observed several splashes of blood about the bark of the tree, and his hand and forehead were both stained; probably the scene I witnessed was a repetition of others acted during the night.
However, Mr. Earnshaw soon convinced him that he was alive still; Joseph hastened to administer a dose of spirits, and by their succour his master presently regained motion and consciousness.
What her last illness was, I am not certain: I conjecture, they died of the same thing, a kind of fever, slow at its commencement, but incurable, and rapidly consuming life towards the close.
I had applied the last, and found that none would do; so, repeating my desire that she would remain there, I was about to hurry home as fast as I could, when an approaching sound arrested me.
“It’s not his tale: they tell that in the village—about your being lost in the marsh; and I calls to Earnshaw, when I come in—‘Eh, they’s queer things, Mr. Hareton, happened since I went off.
The ostler at a roadside public-house was holding a pail of water to refresh my horses, when a cart of very green oats, newly reaped, passed by, and he remarked,—“Yon’s frough Gimmerton, nah!
Before I arrived in sight of it, all that remained of day was a beamless amber light along the west: but I could see every pebble on the path, and every blade of grass, by that splendid moon.
“Five minutes ago Hareton seemed a personification of my youth, not a human being; I felt to him in such a variety of ways, that it would have been impossible to have accosted him rationally.
This is all very provoking to Miss Scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual, and particular.”

“And cross and cruel,” I added; but Helen Burns would not admit my addition: she kept silence.
The dog came bounding back, and seeing his master in a predicament, and hearing the horse groan, barked till the evening hills echoed the sound, which was deep in proportion to his magnitude.
Sir George—whom, by-the-bye, I have forgotten to describe,—a very big, and very fresh-looking country gentleman, stands before their sofa, coffee-cup in hand, and occasionally puts in a word.
I think (with deference be it spoken) the contrast could not be much greater between a sleek gander and a fierce falcon: between a meek sheep and the rough-coated keen-eyed dog, its guardian.
To the billiard-room I hastened: the click of balls and the hum of voices resounded thence; Mr. Rochester, Miss Ingram, the two Misses Eshton, and their admirers, were all busied in the game.
I’ll find you one in time.”

“I shall be glad so to do, sir, if you, in your turn, will promise that I and Adèle shall be both safe out of the house before your bride enters it.”

“Very well!
Adèle claimed your outward attention for a while; yet I fancied your thoughts were elsewhere: but you were very patient with her, my little Jane; you talked to her and amused her a long time.
I want some work: no matter what.”

But it was not her business to think for me, or to seek a place for me: besides, in her eyes, how doubtful must have appeared my character, position, tale.
I drew near houses; I left them, and came back again, and again I wandered away: always repelled by the consciousness of having no claim to ask—no right to expect interest in my isolated lot.
“It is a very strange piece of business,” I added; “I must know more about it.”

“Another time.”

“No; to-night!—to-night!” and as he turned from the door, I placed myself between it and him.
As a conductress of Indian schools, and a helper amongst Indian women, your assistance will be to me invaluable.”

My iron shroud contracted round me; persuasion advanced with slow sure step.
But I am not a fool—go—”

“Where must I go, sir?”

“Your own way—with the husband you have chosen.”

“Who is that?”

“You know—this St. John Rivers.”

“He is not my husband, nor ever will be.
He has maintained a regular, though not frequent, correspondence ever since: he hopes I am happy, and trusts I am not of those who live without God in the world, and only mind earthly things.
You might as well leave a stranger with a brood of tigers!”

“They won’t meddle with persons who touch nothing,” he remarked, putting the bottle before me, and restoring the displaced table.
This spectacle drove me back immediately; I took my hat, and, after a four-miles’ walk, arrived at Heathcliff’s garden-gate just in time to escape the first feathery flakes of a snow shower.
Go, I’m looking at you!”

The little witch put a mock malignity into her beautiful eyes, and Joseph, trembling with sincere horror, hurried out, praying, and ejaculating “wicked” as he went.
“Why do you love him, Miss Cathy?”

“Nonsense, I do—that’s sufficient.”

“By no means; you must say why?”

“Well, because he is handsome, and pleasant to be with.”

“Bad!” was my commentary.
Catherine shall linger no longer to argue with the low ruffian—I have humoured her enough.”

He descended, and bidding the servants wait in the passage, went, followed by me, to the kitchen.
Each has a bludgeon; and master will, very likely, be watching from the parlour-windows to see that they fulfil his orders.”

The gardeners and coachman were there: but Linton was with them.
He was a plain rough man; and he made no scruple to speak his doubts of her surviving this second attack; unless she were more submissive to his directions than she had shown herself before.
He did not hit the right room directly: she motioned me to admit him, but he found it out ere I could reach the door, and in a stride or two was at her side, and had her grasped in his arms.
I desire an explanation: playing and trifling are completely banished out of my mind; and I can’t dance attendance on your affectations now!”

“My affectations!” he murmured; “what are they?
“Now, Catherine Linton,” he said, “stand off, or I shall knock you down; and, that will make Mrs. Dean mad.”

Regardless of this warning, she captured his closed hand and its contents again.
We entered together; Catherine was there, making herself useful in preparing some vegetables for the approaching meal; she looked more sulky and less spirited than when I had seen her first.
I had not courage to walk straight into the apartment; but I desired to divert him from his reverie, and therefore fell foul of the kitchen fire, stirred it, and began to scrape the cinders.
Yet that old man by the kitchen fire affirms he has seen two on ’em looking out of his chamber window on every rainy night since his death:—and an odd thing happened to me about a month ago.
Georgiana sat on a high stool, dressing her hair at the glass, and interweaving her curls with artificial flowers and faded feathers, of which she had found a store in a drawer in the attic.
CHAPTER VII
My first quarter at Lowood seemed an age; and not the golden age either; it comprised an irksome struggle with difficulties in habituating myself to new rules and unwonted tasks.
How could it be otherwise, when Helen, at all times and under all circumstances, evinced for me a quiet and faithful friendship, which ill-humour never soured, nor irritation never troubled?
His figure was enveloped in a riding cloak, fur collared and steel clasped; its details were not apparent, but I traced the general points of middle height and considerable breadth of chest.
I was on the point of risking Mr. Rochester’s displeasure by disobeying his orders, when the light once more gleamed dimly on the gallery wall, and I heard his unshod feet tread the matting.
The post-chaise stopped; the driver rang the door-bell, and a gentleman alighted attired in travelling garb; but it was not Mr. Rochester; it was a tall, fashionable-looking man, a stranger.
“Yes, sir.”

“Have you any salts—volatile salts?”

“Yes.”

“Go back and fetch both.”

I returned, sought the sponge on the washstand, the salts in my drawer, and once more retraced my steps.
Then I went on to describe to her the gay company that had lately been staying at the house; and to these details Bessie listened with interest: they were precisely of the kind she relished.
He threatens me—he continually threatens me with his own death, or mine: and I dream sometimes that I see him laid out with a great wound in his throat, or with a swollen and blackened face.
By Mr. Rochester they were not observed; he was earnestly looking at my face, from which the blood had, I daresay, momentarily fled: for I felt my forehead dewy, and my cheeks and lips cold.
I saw even that to be thus frankly addressed on a subject he had deemed unapproachable—to hear it thus freely handled—was beginning to be felt by him as a new pleasure—an unhoped-for relief.
Before commencing, it is but fair to warn you that the story will sound somewhat hackneyed in your ears; but stale details often regain a degree of freshness when they pass through new lips.
It would please and benefit me to have five thousand pounds; it would torment and oppress me to have twenty thousand; which, moreover, could never be mine in justice, though it might in law.
They were delighted with the renovation and decorations of their rooms; with the new drapery, and fresh carpets, and rich tinted china vases: they expressed their gratification ungrudgingly.
This I could do in the beginning: soon (for I know your powers) you would be as strong and apt as myself, and would not require my help.”

“But my powers—where are they for this undertaking?
My business is to live without him now: nothing so absurd, so weak as to drag on from day to day, as if I were waiting some impossible change in circumstances, which might reunite me to him.
I advanced my head with precaution, desirous to ascertain if any bedroom window-blinds were yet drawn up: battlements, windows, long front—all from this sheltered station were at my command.
But I always woke and found it an empty mockery; and I was desolate and abandoned—my life dark, lonely, hopeless—my soul athirst and forbidden to drink—my heart famished and never to be fed.
The first creak of the oak startled him like an electric shock: the light leaped from his hold to a distance of some feet, and his agitation was so extreme, that he could hardly pick it up.
Heathcliff, on the second thoughts, resolved to avoid a struggle against three underlings: he seized the poker, smashed the lock from the inner door, and made his escape as they tramped in.
To this point he has been discreet in dreading to provoke me; you must represent the peril of quitting that policy, and remind him of my passionate temper, verging, when kindled, on frenzy.
I determined they should come about as they pleased for me; and though it was a tiresomely slow process, I began to rejoice at length in a faint dawn of its progress: as I thought at first.
He had only then come from the library; and, in passing through the lobby, had noticed our talking and been attracted by curiosity, or fear, to examine what it signified, at that late hour.
I blamed her, as she deserved, for bringing it all on herself; and ended by hoping that he would follow Mr. Linton’s example and avoid future interference with his family, for good or evil.
I can hardly regard her in the light of a rational creature, so obstinately has she persisted in forming a fabulous notion of my character and acting on the false impressions she cherished.
“How did she die?” he resumed, at last—fain, notwithstanding his hardihood, to have a support behind him; for, after the struggle, he trembled, in spite of himself, to his very finger-ends.
The place of Catherine’s interment, to the surprise of the villagers, was neither in the chapel under the carved monument of the Lintons, nor yet by the tombs of her own relations, outside.
Earnshaw has a mind to shoot you, if you persist in endeavouring to enter.’

“‘You’d better open the door, you—’ he answered, addressing me by some elegant term that I don’t care to repeat.
He was donned in his Sunday garments, with his most sanctimonious and sourest face, and, holding his hat in one hand, and his stick in the other, he proceeded to clean his shoes on the mat.
Mr. Linton has a prejudice against me: we quarrelled at one time of our lives, with unchristian ferocity; and, if you mention coming here to him, he’ll put a veto on your visits altogether.
She put the door gently too, slipped off her snowy shoes, untied her hat, and was proceeding, unconscious of my espionage, to lay aside her mantle, when I suddenly rose and revealed myself.
Come, you shall take notice of me, Hareton: you are my cousin, and you shall own me.”

“I shall have naught to do wi’ you and your mucky pride, and your damned mocking tricks!” he answered.
“I’m animated with hunger; and, seemingly, I must not eat.”

“Your dinner is here,” I returned; “why won’t you get it?”

“I don’t want it now,” he muttered, hastily: “I’ll wait till supper.
“There’s Heathcliff and a woman yonder, under t’ nab,” he blubbered, “un’ I darnut pass ’em.”

I saw nothing; but neither the sheep nor he would go on so I bid him take the road lower down.
Abbot, too, was sewing in another room, and Bessie, as she moved hither and thither, putting away toys and arranging drawers, addressed to me every now and then a word of unwonted kindness.
I have a little boy, younger than you, who knows six Psalms by heart: and when you ask him which he would rather have, a gingerbread-nut to eat or a verse of a Psalm to learn, he says: ‘Oh!
as it was, I derived from both a strange excitement, and reckless and feverish, I wished the wind to howl more wildly, the gloom to deepen to darkness, and the confusion to rise to clamour.
J’ai dit qu’oui: car c’est vrai, n’est-ce pas, mademoiselle?”

I and my pupil dined as usual in Mrs. Fairfax’s parlour; the afternoon was wild and snowy, and we passed it in the schoolroom.
Above the temples, amidst wreathed turban folds of black drapery, vague in its character and consistency as cloud, gleamed a ring of white flame, gemmed with sparkles of a more lurid tinge.
We found the apartment vacant; a large fire burning silently on the marble hearth, and wax candles shining in bright solitude, amid the exquisite flowers with which the tables were adorned.
If she had managed the victory at once, and he had yielded and sincerely laid his heart at her feet, I should have covered my face, turned to the wall, and (figuratively) have died to them.
Besides, you might have waited till to-morrow, and had me with you: it was mere folly to attempt the interview to-night, and alone.”

“I thought I could have done some good.”

“You thought!
The west wind whispered in the ivy round me; but no gentle Ariel borrowed its breath as a medium of speech: the birds sang in the tree-tops; but their song, however sweet, was inarticulate.
“When do you wish to go?”

“Early to-morrow morning, sir.”

“Well, you must have some money; you can’t travel without money, and I daresay you have not much: I have given you no salary yet.
In other people’s presence I was, as formerly, deferential and quiet; any other line of conduct being uncalled for: it was only in the evening conferences I thus thwarted and afflicted him.
Mr. Rochester continued, hardily and recklessly: “Bigamy is an ugly word!—I meant, however, to be a bigamist; but fate has out-manoeuvred me, or Providence has checked me,—perhaps the last.
And now I thought: till now I had only heard, seen, moved—followed up and down where I was led or dragged—watched event rush on event, disclosure open beyond disclosure: but now, I thought.
Could I but have stiffened to the still frost—the friendly numbness of death—it might have pelted on; I should not have felt it; but my yet living flesh shuddered at its chilling influence.
The candle, whose ray had been my beacon, burnt on the table; and by its light an elderly woman, somewhat rough-looking, but scrupulously clean, like all about her, was knitting a stocking.
She had then on a dark-blue silk dress; her arms and her neck were bare; her only ornament was her chestnut tresses, which waved over her shoulders with all the wild grace of natural curls.
or would the sight of it bring recollections calculated to enervate and distress?”

He now furtively raised his eyes: he glanced at me, irresolute, disturbed: he again surveyed the picture.
I daresay it is only a rat scrambling along the rafters of the adjoining schoolroom: it was a barn before I had it repaired and altered, and barns are generally haunted by rats.—To proceed.
Nothing of course to speak of—twenty thousand pounds, I think they say—but what is that?”

“Twenty thousand pounds?”

Here was a new stunner—I had been calculating on four or five thousand.
“You do not want it.”

I will not swear, reader, that there was not something of repressed sarcasm both in the tone in which I uttered this sentence, and in the feeling that accompanied it.
He sent Mrs. Fairfax, the housekeeper, away to her friends at a distance; but he did it handsomely, for he settled an annuity on her for life: and she deserved it—she was a very good woman.
Where does he now live?”

“At Ferndean, a manor-house on a farm he has, about thirty miles off: quite a desolate spot.”

“Who is with him?”

“Old John and his wife: he would have none else.
At the top of an extra page (quite a treasure, probably, when first lighted on) I was greatly amused to behold an excellent caricature of my friend Joseph,—rudely, yet powerfully sketched.
I did, though: I vociferated curses enough to annihilate any fiend in Christendom; and I got a stone and thrust it between his jaws, and tried with all my might to cram it down his throat.
Though I cannot say I made a gentle nurse, and Joseph and the master were no better, and though our patient was as wearisome and headstrong as a patient could be, she weathered it through.
Mrs. Linton, on the third day, unbarred her door, and having finished the water in her pitcher and decanter, desired a renewed supply, and a basin of gruel, for she believed she was dying.
He swore it was not, nor ever should be, mine; and he’d—but I’ll not repeat his language, nor describe his habitual conduct: he is ingenious and unresting in seeking to gain my abhorrence!
I bemoaned that, as I gazed on the feeble orphan; and I mentally abused old Linton for (what was only natural partiality) the securing his estate to his own daughter, instead of his son’s.
“This morning, when I came down, about half an hour before noon, Mr. Earnshaw was sitting by the fire, deadly sick; his evil genius, almost as gaunt and ghastly, leant against the chimney.
When I could get him to listen, I saw it pleased him that his sister had left her husband; whom he abhorred with an intensity which the mildness of his nature would scarcely seem to allow.
“Sure-ly,” said Joseph after a grave inspection, “he’s swopped wi’ ye, Maister, an’ yon’s his lass!”

Heathcliff, having stared his son into an ague of confusion, uttered a scornful laugh.
And then she cried, and took a little picture from her neck, and said I should have that; two pictures in a gold case, on one side her mother, and on the other uncle, when they were young.
However, Mr. Heathcliff has claimed and kept them in his wife’s right and his also: I suppose legally; at any rate, Catherine, destitute of cash and friends, cannot disturb his possession.
It would do you a great deal of good: it would make you another man to have her for a companion.”

“A companion!” he cried; “when she hates me, and does not think me fit to wipe her shoon!
He did not quit the house again that afternoon, and no one intruded on his solitude; till, at eight o’clock, I deemed it proper, though unsummoned, to carry a candle and his supper to him.
Yet, still, I don’t like being out in the dark now; and I don’t like being left by myself in this grim house: I cannot help it; I shall be glad when they leave it, and shift to the Grange.
Agnes and Catherine Johnstone were invited to take tea with some friends at Lowton last Thursday, and I gave them leave to put on clean tuckers for the occasion.”

Mr. Brocklehurst nodded.
They conversed of things I had never heard of; of nations and times past; of countries far away; of secrets of nature discovered or guessed at: they spoke of books: how many they had read!
She went into the house; I stayed behind a few minutes to plant in my garden a handful of roots I had dug up in the forest, and which I feared would wither if I left them till the morning.
The first represented clouds low and livid, rolling over a swollen sea: all the distance was in eclipse; so, too, was the foreground; or rather, the nearest billows, for there was no land.
I found the sick-room unwatched, as I had expected: no nurse was there; the patient lay still, and seemingly lethargic; her livid face sunk in the pillows: the fire was dying in the grate.
The west, too, was warm: no watery gleam chilled it—it seemed as if there was a fire lit, an altar burning behind its screen of marbled vapour, and out of apertures shone a golden redness.
Wrapped up in a shawl, I still carried the unknown little child: I might not lay it down anywhere, however tired were my arms—however much its weight impeded my progress, I must retain it.
I am an old resident in this neighbourhood, sir, and I never heard of a Mrs. Rochester at Thornfield Hall.”

I saw a grim smile contort Mr. Rochester’s lips, and he muttered—

“No, by God!
She wor the pictur’ o’ ye, Mary: Diana is more like your father.”

I thought them so similar I could not tell where the old servant (for such I now concluded her to be) saw the difference.
I will even tell you the name of the establishment, where I passed six years as a pupil, and two as a teacher—Lowood Orphan Asylum, ——shire: you will have heard of it, Mr. Rivers?—the Rev.
Intimate attachment!”

“But, Jane, your aspirations after family ties and domestic happiness may be realised otherwise than by the means you contemplate: you may marry.”

“Nonsense, again!
I left Moor House at three o’clock P.M., and soon after four I stood at the foot of the sign-post of Whitcross, waiting the arrival of the coach which was to take me to distant Thornfield.
That I merited all I endured, I acknowledged—that I could scarcely endure more, I pleaded; and the alpha and omega of my heart’s wishes broke involuntarily from my lips in the words—‘Jane!
The dismal spiritual atmosphere overcame, and more than neutralised, the glowing physical comforts round me; and I resolved to be cautious how I ventured under those rafters a third time.
He sat within earshot, milking the cows by the light of a lantern, which I seized unceremoniously, and, calling out that I would send it back on the morrow, rushed to the nearest postern.
He exerted preterhuman self-denial in abstaining from finishing him completely; but getting out of breath, he finally desisted, and dragged the apparently inanimate body on to the settle.
I perceived he was bent on refusing my mediation, so very reluctantly I went up to the library, and announced the unseasonable visitor, advising that he should be dismissed till next day.
I said his heaven would be only half alive; and he said mine would be drunk: I said I should fall asleep in his; and he said he could not breathe in mine, and began to grow very snappish.
Begone wi’ ye both!’

“He swore at us, and left Linton no time to answer, nearly throwing him into the kitchen; and he clenched his fist as I followed, seemingly longing to knock me down.
Catherine we would fain have deluded yet; but her own quick spirit refused to delude her: it divined in secret, and brooded on the dreadful probability, gradually ripening into certainty.
You’ll perhaps think me rather inclined to become so,” he added, making an effort to smile, “if I try to describe the thousand forms of past associations and ideas he awakens or embodies.
You did not when you saw him, Mr. Lockwood: and at the period of which I speak, he was just the same as then; only fonder of continued solitude, and perhaps still more laconic in company.
But Bessie, as soon as she had dressed her young ladies, used to take herself off to the lively regions of the kitchen and housekeeper’s room, generally bearing the candle along with her.
What my sensations were, no language can describe; but just as they all rose, stifling my breath and constricting my throat, a girl came up and passed me: in passing, she lifted her eyes.
The spell by which I had been so far supported began to dissolve; reaction took place, and soon, so overwhelming was the grief that seized me, I sank prostrate with my face to the ground.
No,—I exaggerate; I never thought there was any consecrating virtue about her: it was rather a sort of pastille perfume she had left; a scent of musk and amber, than an odour of sanctity.
I turned my face away to conceal a smile I could not suppress: there was something ludicrous as well as painful in the little Parisienne’s earnest and innate devotion to matters of dress.
A certain superciliousness of look, coolness of manner, nonchalance of tone, express fully their sentiments on the point, without committing them by any positive rudeness in word or deed.
May you never appeal to Heaven in prayers so hopeless and so agonised as in that hour left my lips; for never may you, like me, dread to be the instrument of evil to what you wholly love.
I will tell you as much of the history of the wanderer you have harboured, as I can tell without compromising my own peace of mind—my own security, moral and physical, and that of others.
I was astonished when a fortnight passed without reply; but when two months wore away, and day after day the post arrived and brought nothing for me, I fell a prey to the keenest anxiety.
Of course (as St. John once said) I must seek another interest in life to replace the one lost: is not the occupation he now offers me truly the most glorious man can adopt or God assign?
Simplify your complicated interests, feelings, thoughts, wishes, aims; merge all considerations in one purpose: that of fulfilling with effect—with power—the mission of your great Master.
We all kept as mute as mice a full half-hour, and should have done so longer, only Joseph, having finished his chapter, got up and said that he must rouse the master for prayers and bed.
And yet, my dear, the child is in mourning—surely it is—and she may be lamed for life!’

“‘What culpable carelessness in her brother!’ exclaimed Mr. Linton, turning from me to Catherine.
Mr. and Mrs. Earnshaw watched anxiously their meeting; thinking it would enable them to judge, in some measure, what grounds they had for hoping to succeed in separating the two friends.
Why are you so damp and pale, child?”

“I’ve been wet,” she answered reluctantly, “and I’m cold, that’s all.”

“Oh, she is naughty!” I cried, perceiving the master to be tolerably sober.
At other times, she would turn petulantly away, and hide her face in her hands, or even push him off angrily; and then he took care to let her alone, for he was certain of doing no good.
After concluding these precious orisons—and they lasted generally till he grew hoarse and his voice was strangled in his throat—he would be off again; always straight down to the Grange!
Her hope was that Linton might be left with him, as he had been with her: his father, she would fain convince herself, had no desire to assume the burden of his maintenance or education.
His nephew’s offering of thanks was duly delivered, Miss Cathy gently touching on the rest: I also threw little light on his inquiries, for I hardly knew what to hide and what to reveal.
I was embarrassed how to punish him when I discovered his part in the business: he’s such a cobweb, a pinch would annihilate him; but you’ll see by his look that he has received his due!
“I’m glad to see you out of doors again, Mr. Lockwood,” he said, in reply to my greeting; “from selfish motives partly: I don’t think I could readily supply your loss in this desolation.
Business now began: the day’s Collect was repeated, then certain texts of Scripture were said, and to these succeeded a protracted reading of chapters in the Bible, which lasted an hour.
I was noting these things and enjoying them as a child might, when it entered my mind as it had never done before:—

“How sad to be lying now on a sick bed, and to be in danger of dying!
In time I rose to be the first girl of the first class; then I was invested with the office of teacher; which I discharged with zeal for two years: but at the end of that time I altered.
“Yes, you are right: do sit down.”

She conducted me to her own chair, and then began to remove my shawl and untie my bonnet-strings; I begged she would not give herself so much trouble.
“I have found it all out,” said he, setting his candle down on the washstand; “it is as I thought.”

“How, sir?”

He made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, looking on the ground.
I knew gipsies and fortune-tellers did not express themselves as this seeming old woman had expressed herself; besides I had noted her feigned voice, her anxiety to conceal her features.
It was very clean and neat: the ornamental windows were hung with little white curtains; the floor was spotless; the grate and fire-irons were burnished bright, and the fire burnt clear.
Soon I had traced on the paper a broad and prominent forehead and a square lower outline of visage: that contour gave me pleasure; my fingers proceeded actively to fill it with features.
They are making hay, too, in Thornfield meadows: or rather, the labourers are just quitting their work, and returning home with their rakes on their shoulders, now, at the hour I arrive.
My eye still roved over the sullen swell and along the moor-edge, vanishing amidst the wildest scenery, when at one dim point, far in among the marshes and the ridges, a light sprang up.
Mary, are you?”

“Mortally: after all, it’s tough work fagging away at a language with no master but a lexicon.”

“It is, especially such a language as this crabbed but glorious Deutsch.
Try if she can speak now—ask her her name.”

I felt I could speak, and I answered—“My name is Jane Elliott.” Anxious as ever to avoid discovery, I had before resolved to assume an alias.
I was so fully aware that only serious moods and occupations were acceptable, that in his presence every effort to sustain or follow any other became vain: I fell under a freezing spell.
I want a wife: the sole helpmeet I can influence efficiently in life, and retain absolutely till death.”

I shuddered as he spoke: I felt his influence in my marrow—his hold on my limbs.
Ferndean then remained uninhabited and unfurnished, with the exception of some two or three rooms fitted up for the accommodation of the squire when he went there in the season to shoot.
One was about forty: a period of mental vigour at which men seldom cherish the delusion of being married for love by girls: that dream is reserved for the solace of our declining years.
look here, Joseph,” she continued, taking a long, dark book from a shelf; “I’ll show you how far I’ve progressed in the Black Art: I shall soon be competent to make a clear house of it.
I told them I intended by no means to encourage their tricks: but as the prisoner had never broken his fast since yesterday’s dinner, I would wink at his cheating Mr. Hindley that once.
The morning was fresh and cool; I threw back the lattice, and presently the room filled with sweet scents from the garden; but Catherine called peevishly to me, “Ellen, shut the window.
“Try for yourself, if that be your spirit: I have done, and yield the argument to your saucy insolence.”—

“And I must suffer for her egotism!” she sobbed, as Mrs. Linton left the room.
I’m afraid of being alone!”

I took her hand in mine, and bid her be composed; for a succession of shudders convulsed her frame, and she would keep straining her gaze towards the glass.
We knew she was really better, and, therefore, decided that long confinement to a single place produced much of this despondency, and it might be partially removed by a change of scene.
I listened to detect a woman’s voice in the house, and filled the interim with wild regrets and dismal anticipations, which, at last, spoke audibly in irrepressible sighing and weeping.
Being at liberty, I lost no time in seeking the old servant; who, having gathered by degrees the purport of my hasty tale, hurried below, gasping, as he descended the steps two at once.
I could gather, however, that her guide had been a favourite till she hurt his feelings by addressing him as a servant; and Heathcliff’s housekeeper hurt hers by calling him her cousin.
“You’ll make her weep too—see how sorry she is for you!”

I do not know whether it was sorrow for him, but his cousin put on as sad a countenance as himself, and returned to her father.
He did not thoroughly comprehend the meaning of his father’s speech, or whether it were intended for him: indeed, he was not yet certain that the grim, sneering stranger was his father.
‘I never missed such a concern as you.’

“‘But I offered more than once, and asked,’ he said, kindling up at her pertness, ‘I asked Mr. Heathcliff to let me wake for you—’

“‘Be silent!
I could both see them and hear them talk before I entered, and looked and listened in consequence; being moved thereto by a mingled sense of curiosity and envy, that grew as I lingered.
He fair shaamed to ’bide still and see it.”

She did not stay to retaliate, but re-entered in a minute, bearing a reaming silver pint, whose contents I lauded with becoming earnestness.
I cannot conceive what he has been doing.”

That noon he sat down to dinner with us, and received a heaped-up plate from my hands, as if he intended to make amends for previous fasting.
But the country folks, if you ask them, would swear on the Bible that he walks: there are those who speak to having met him near the church, and on the moor, and even within this house.
Miss Temple, that girl’s hair must be cut off entirely; I will send a barber to-morrow: and I see others who have far too much of the excrescence—that tall girl, tell her to turn round.
My favourite seat was a smooth and broad stone, rising white and dry from the very middle of the beck, and only to be got at by wading through the water; a feat I accomplished barefoot.
“There are no more,” said she; and I put it in my pocket and turned my face homeward: I could not open it then; rules obliged me to be back by eight, and it was already half-past seven.
When we left the dining-room, she proposed to show me over the rest of the house; and I followed her upstairs and downstairs, admiring as I went; for all was well arranged and handsome.
CHAPTER XII
The promise of a smooth career, which my first calm introduction to Thornfield Hall seemed to pledge, was not belied on a longer acquaintance with the place and its inmates.
I valued what was good in Mrs. Fairfax, and what was good in Adèle; but I believed in the existence of other and more vivid kinds of goodness, and what I believed in I wished to behold.
No, reader: gratitude, and many associations, all pleasurable and genial, made his face the object I best liked to see; his presence in a room was more cheering than the brightest fire.
Most gentlemen would admire her, I thought; and that he did admire her, I already seemed to have obtained proof: to remove the last shade of doubt, it remained but to see them together.
For when I say that I am of his kind, I do not mean that I have his force to influence, and his spell to attract; I mean only that I have certain tastes and feelings in common with him.
If you err wilfully, I shall devise a proportionate punishment.”

“Miss Ingram ought to be clement, for she has it in her power to inflict a chastisement beyond mortal endurance.”

“Ha!
“Only take off the red cloak, sir, and then—”

“But the string is in a knot—help me.”

“Break it, sir.”

“There, then—‘Off, ye lendings!’” And Mr. Rochester stepped out of his disguise.
We have been good friends, Jane; have we not?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And when friends are on the eve of separation, they like to spend the little time that remains to them close to each other.
If you are true, and your offer real, my only feelings to you must be gratitude and devotion—they cannot torture.”

“Gratitude!” he ejaculated; and added wildly—“Jane accept me quickly.
She then peeped round to where I sat; so stern a neighbour was too restrictive: to him, in his present fractious mood, she dared whisper no observations, nor ask of him any information.
I would not ascribe vice to him; I would not say he had betrayed me; but the attribute of stainless truth was gone from his idea, and from his presence I must go: that I perceived well.
Bertha Mason, the true daughter of an infamous mother, dragged me through all the hideous and degrading agonies which must attend a man bound to a wife at once intemperate and unchaste.
There was an unceremonious directness, a searching, decided steadfastness in his gaze now, which told that intention, and not diffidence, had hitherto kept it averted from the stranger.
But she could not eradicate nature: nor will it be eradicated ‘till this mortal shall put on immortality.’”

Having said this, he took his hat, which lay on the table beside my palette.
I knew, by instinct, how the matter stood, before St. John had said another word; but I cannot expect the reader to have the same intuitive perception, so I must repeat his explanation.
It is better so: Hannah shall go with you.”

“Tell her to be ready by to-morrow then; and here is the schoolroom key: I will give you the key of my cottage in the morning.”

He took it.
“Not at all; he had, on the contrary, remarked that I had scrupulously respected every association: he feared, indeed, I must have bestowed more thought on the matter than it was worth.
Who knows but your father was Emperor of China, and your mother an Indian queen, each of them able to buy up, with one week’s income, Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange together?
We were busy with the hay in a far-away field, when the girl that usually brought our breakfasts came running an hour too soon across the meadow and up the lane, calling me as she ran.
They think I’m blind; but I’m noan: nowt ut t’ soart!—I seed young Linton boath coming and going, and I seed yah” (directing his discourse to me), “yah gooid fur nowt, slattenly witch!
* * * * *

At this point of the housekeeper’s story she chanced to glance towards the time-piece over the chimney; and was in amazement on seeing the minute-hand measure half-past one.
The delirium was not fixed, however; having weaned her eyes from contemplating the outer darkness, by degrees she centred her attention on him, and discovered who it was that held her.
I sha’n’t tell my reasons for making this inquiry; but I beseech you to explain, if you can, what I have married: that is, when you call to see me; and you must call, Ellen, very soon.
“No one has a right to talk in that manner, and I won’t hear my brother depreciated in silence!”

“Your brother is wondrous fond of you too, isn’t he?” observed Heathcliff, scornfully.
Linton spent his days and nights there, a sleepless guardian; and—a circumstance concealed from all but me—Heathcliff spent his nights, at least, outside, equally a stranger to repose.
Nobody alive would regret me, or be ashamed, though I cut my throat this minute—and it’s time to make an end!’

“I might as well have struggled with a bear, or reasoned with a lunatic.
The clouded windows of hell flashed a moment towards me; the fiend which usually looked out, however, was so dimmed and drowned that I did not fear to hazard another sound of derision.
I have a room upstairs, furnished for him in handsome style; I’ve engaged a tutor, also, to come three times a week, from twenty miles’ distance, to teach him what he pleases to learn.
Not so my companion: she ran back in terror, knelt down, and cried, and soothed, and entreated, till he grew quiet from lack of breath: by no means from compunction at distressing her.
I had brought some of my nicest books for him: he asked me to read a little of one, and I was about to comply, when Earnshaw burst the door open: having gathered venom with reflection.
We deferred our excursion till the afternoon; a golden afternoon of August: every breath from the hills so full of life, that it seemed whoever respired it, though dying, might revive.
And whatever it was, it communicated, apparently, both pleasure and pain in exquisite extremes: at least the anguished, yet raptured, expression of his countenance suggested that idea.
But in the afternoon, while Joseph and Hareton were at their work, he came into the kitchen again, and, with a wild look, bid me come and sit in the house: he wanted somebody with him.
I heard voices, too, speaking with a hollow sound, and as if muffled by a rush of wind or water: agitation, uncertainty, and an all-predominating sense of terror confused my faculties.
“Why don’t you come when you are called?”

Bessie’s presence, compared with the thoughts over which I had been brooding, seemed cheerful; even though, as usual, she was somewhat cross.
She considered me attentively for a minute or two, then further added—

“She had better be put to bed soon; she looks tired: are you tired?” she asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.
About a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated, Miss Temple, who had written to Mr. Lloyd, received his answer: it appeared that what he said went to corroborate my account.
It passed off in a clamorous peal that seemed to wake an echo in every lonely chamber; though it originated but in one, and I could have pointed out the door whence the accents issued.
Adèle came running to meet us in the hall, exclaiming—

“Mesdames, vous êtes servies!” adding, “J’ai bien faim, moi!”

We found dinner ready, and waiting for us in Mrs. Fairfax’s room.
Thence a narrow passage led into the hall: in crossing it, I perceived my sandal was loose; I stopped to tie it, kneeling down for that purpose on the mat at the foot of the staircase.
CHAPTER XVIII
Merry days were these at Thornfield Hall; and busy days too: how different from the first three months of stillness, monotony, and solitude I had passed beneath its roof!
I watched her for nearly half-an-hour: during all that time she never turned a page, and her face grew momently darker, more dissatisfied, and more sourly expressive of disappointment.
After my mother’s death, I wash my hands of you: from the day her coffin is carried to the vault in Gateshead Church, you and I will be as separate as if we had never known each other.
It is true, that while I worked, she would idle; and I thought to myself, “If you and I were destined to live always together, cousin, we would commence matters on a different footing.
“How do you know?”

“I have a witness to the fact, whose testimony even you, sir, will scarcely controvert.”

“Produce him—or go to hell.”

“I will produce him first—he is on the spot.
She was a big woman, in stature almost equalling her husband, and corpulent besides: she showed virile force in the contest—more than once she almost throttled him, athletic as he was.
If you were mad, do you think I should hate you?”

“I do indeed, sir.”

“Then you are mistaken, and you know nothing about me, and nothing about the sort of love of which I am capable.
You may take the maniac with you to England; confine her with due attendance and precautions at Thornfield: then travel yourself to what clime you will, and form what new tie you like.
Nature seemed to me benign and good; I thought she loved me, outcast as I was; and I, who from man could anticipate only mistrust, rejection, insult, clung to her with filial fondness.
Prejudices, it is well known, are most difficult to eradicate from the heart whose soil has never been loosened or fertilised by education: they grow there, firm as weeds among stones.
Much enjoyment I do not expect in the life opening before me: yet it will, doubtless, if I regulate my mind, and exert my powers as I ought, yield me enough to live on from day to day.
One evening when, at bedtime, his sisters and I stood round him, bidding him good-night, he kissed each of them, as was his custom; and, as was equally his custom, he gave me his hand.
“He’ll be in soon.”

I obeyed; and hemmed, and called the villain Juno, who deigned, at this second interview, to move the extreme tip of her tail, in token of owning my acquaintance.
Heathcliff arrived underneath just at the critical moment; by a natural impulse he arrested his descent, and setting him on his feet, looked up to discover the author of the accident.
“I’m not envious: I never feel hurt at the brightness of Isabella’s yellow hair and the whiteness of her skin, at her dainty elegance, and the fondness all the family exhibit for her.
After a pause and a prolonged gaze, she resumed; addressing me in accents of indignant disappointment:—

“Oh, you see, Nelly, he would not relent a moment to keep me out of the grave.
Wash that stuff away; and mind the sparks of your candle—it is more than half brandy!’

“‘And so ye’ve been murthering on him?’ exclaimed Joseph, lifting his hands and eyes in horror.
It struck beneath my ear, and stopped the sentence I was uttering; but, pulling it out, I sprang to the door and delivered another; which I hope went a little deeper than his missile.
I can’t be prevented from going to Wuthering Heights, except by inflicting misery on two people; whereas, if you’ll only not tell papa, my going need disturb the tranquillity of none.
It suited Catherine to have him there: at any rate, it made her hate her room upstairs more than ever: and she would compel me to find out business below, that she might accompany me.
With my hard constitution and temperate mode of living, and unperilous occupations, I ought to, and probably shall, remain above ground till there is scarcely a black hair on my head.
“Come in, and kindle me a fire, and do anything there is to do about the room.”

“I must blow the coals red first, before I can carry any,” I replied, getting a chair and the bellows.
It opened clear on my comprehension that Helen Burns was numbering her last days in this world, and that she was going to be taken to the region of spirits, if such region there were.
It did not seem as if a prop were withdrawn, but rather as if a motive were gone: it was not the power to be tranquil which had failed me, but the reason for tranquillity was no more.
Almost all the land in this neighbourhood, as far as you can see, has belonged to the Rochesters time out of mind.”

“Well, but, leaving his land out of the question, do you like him?
“No crowding,” said Mr. Rochester: “take the drawings from my hand as I finish with them; but don’t push your faces up to mine.”

He deliberately scrutinised each sketch and painting.
I see at intervals the glance of a curious sort of bird through the close-set bars of a cage: a vivid, restless, resolute captive is there; were it but free, it would soar cloud-high.
“Well, I sometimes think we are too quiet; but we run a chance of being busy enough now: for a little while at least,” said Mrs. Fairfax, still holding the note before her spectacles.
What was the gallant grace of the Lynns, the languid elegance of Lord Ingram,—even the military distinction of Colonel Dent, contrasted with his look of native pith and genuine power?
Mr. Mason, shivering as some one chanced to open the door, asked for more coal to be put on the fire, which had burnt out its flame, though its mass of cinder still shone hot and red.
You don’t travel a hundred miles alone.”

“No, sir, she has sent her coachman.”

“A person to be trusted?”

“Yes, sir, he has lived ten years in the family.”

Mr. Rochester meditated.
I believe she was happy in her way: this routine sufficed for her; and nothing annoyed her so much as the occurrence of any incident which forced her to vary its clockwork regularity.
Everything in life seems unreal.”

“Except me: I am substantial enough—touch me.”

“You, sir, are the most phantom-like of all: you are a mere dream.”

He held out his hand, laughing.
I know not whether the day was fair or foul; in descending the drive, I gazed neither on sky nor earth: my heart was with my eyes; and both seemed migrated into Mr. Rochester’s frame.
“Take it back to the coach-house, John,” said Mr. Rochester coolly; “it will not be wanted to-day.”

At our entrance, Mrs. Fairfax, Adèle, Sophie, Leah, advanced to meet and greet us.
I ought probably to have done or said nothing; but I was so tortured by a sense of remorse at thus hurting his feelings, I could not control the wish to drop balm where I had wounded.
I was rich enough now—yet poor to hideous indigence: a nature the most gross, impure, depraved I ever saw, was associated with mine, and called by the law and by society a part of me.
He threw himself down on a swell of heath, and there lay still
“I can do what he wants me to do: I am forced to see and acknowledge that,” I meditated,—“that is, if life be spared me.
I took care she should never want for anything that could contribute to her comfort: she soon settled in her new abode, became very happy there, and made fair progress in her studies.
He cannot now see very distinctly: he cannot read or write much; but he can find his way without being led by the hand: the sky is no longer a blank to him—the earth no longer a void.
While enjoying a month of fine weather at the sea-coast, I was thrown into the company of a most fascinating creature: a real goddess in my eyes, as long as she took no notice of me.
Not liking to show him that I had heard the conflict, I continued my toilette rather noisily, looked at my watch, and soliloquised on the length of the night: “Not three o’clock yet!
Before I recovered sufficiently to see and hear, it began to be dawn, and, Nelly, I’ll tell you what I thought, and what has kept recurring and recurring till I feared for my reason.
She even disgraces the name of Linton; and I’ve sometimes relented, from pure lack of invention, in my experiments on what she could endure, and still creep shamefully cringing back!
If he had remained among the larches all night, he would have heard nothing of the stir at the Grange; unless, perhaps, he might catch the gallop of the messenger going to Gimmerton.
It was dug on a green slope in a corner of the kirk-yard, where the wall is so low that heath and bilberry-plants have climbed over it from the moor; and peat-mould almost buries it.
There he has continued, praying like a Methodist: only the deity he implored is senseless dust and ashes; and God, when addressed, was curiously confounded with his own black father!
The moors, where you ramble with him, are much nicer; and Thrushcross Park is the finest place in the world.”

“But I know the park, and I don’t know those,” she murmured to herself.
An early ride on such a beautiful morning is much preferable to an hour’s more sleep.”

“Is she to go with us,” he demanded, “the little girl I saw yesterday?”

“Not now,” replied I.
Our hurry prevented any comment on the encounter with Heathcliff, as we stretched towards home; but I divined instinctively that Catherine’s heart was clouded now in double darkness.
Linton had slid from his seat on to the hearthstone, and lay writhing in the mere perverseness of an indulged plague of a child, determined to be as grievous and harassing as it can.
Niver heed, Hareton, lad—dunnut be ’feard—he cannot get at thee!’

“I took hold of Linton’s hands, and tried to pull him away; but he shrieked so shockingly that I dared not proceed.
She’s glad to be obliged to stay, I’m certain.”

At learning the chance we had missed, we both gave vent to our grief without control; and he allowed us to wail on till nine o’clock.
Catherine evinced a child’s annoyance at this neglect; repaid it with contempt, and thus enlisted my informant among her enemies, as securely as if she had done her some great wrong.
Your cheeks are hollow, and your eyes blood-shot, like a person starving with hunger and going blind with loss of sleep.”

“It is not my fault that I cannot eat or rest,” he replied.
Externals have a great effect on the young: I thought that a fairer era of life was beginning for me, one that was to have its flowers and pleasures, as well as its thorns and toils.
It was a large, stately apartment, with purple chairs and curtains, a Turkey carpet, walnut-panelled walls, one vast window rich in stained glass, and a lofty ceiling, nobly moulded.
Never mind the ladies to-night; perhaps you will see them to-morrow: here is your dinner.”

She was really hungry, so the chicken and tarts served to divert her attention for a time.
“Well, I observed to him that as you were unused to company, I did not think you would like appearing before so gay a party—all strangers; and he replied, in his quick way—‘Nonsense!
Mr. Rochester, having quitted the Eshtons, stands on the hearth as solitary as she stands by the table: she confronts him, taking her station on the opposite side of the mantelpiece.
You must open the middle drawer of my toilet-table and take out a little phial and a little glass you will find there,—quick!”

I flew thither and back, bringing the desired vessels.
I am little better than a devil at this moment; and, as my pastor there would tell me, deserve no doubt the sternest judgments of God, even to the quenchless fire and deathless worm.
“No, Jane,” he returned: “what necessity is there to dwell on the Past, when the Present is so much surer—the Future so much brighter?”

I shuddered to hear the infatuated assertion.
There was a reviving pleasure in this intercourse, of a kind now tasted by me for the first time—the pleasure arising from perfect congeniality of tastes, sentiments, and principles.
Good fortune opens the hand as well as the heart wonderfully; and to give somewhat when we have largely received, is but to afford a vent to the unusual ebullition of the sensations.
When all was finished, I thought Moor House as complete a model of bright modest snugness within, as it was, at this season, a specimen of wintry waste and desert dreariness without.
How much of him was saint, how much mortal, I could not heretofore tell: but revelations were being made in this conference: the analysis of his nature was proceeding before my eyes.
Letters have proved of no avail—personal inquiry shall replace them.”

At breakfast I announced to Diana and Mary that I was going a journey, and should be absent at least four days.
Rochester, if ever I did a good deed in my life—if ever I thought a good thought—if ever I prayed a sincere and blameless prayer—if ever I wished a righteous wish,—I am rewarded now.
He tears down my handiwork, boxes my ears, and croaks:

“‘T’ maister nobbut just buried, and Sabbath not o’ered, und t’ sound o’ t’ gospel still i’ yer lugs, and ye darr be laiking!
You have no right to nip me, and I’m not going to bear it.”

“I didn’t touch you, you lying creature!” cried she, her fingers tingling to repeat the act, and her ears red with rage.
Edgar is restored from the ill-temper he gave way to at your coming; I begin to be secure and tranquil; and you, restless to know us at peace, appear resolved on exciting a quarrel.
What in the name of all that feels has he to do with books, when I am dying?”

She could not bear the notion which I had put into her head of Mr. Linton’s philosophical resignation.
The doctor, on examining the case for himself, spoke hopefully to him of its having a favourable termination, if we could only preserve around her perfect and constant tranquillity.
Mr. Linton had resumed his seat by the bed; on my re-entrance, he raised his eyes, read the meaning of my blank aspect, and dropped them without giving an order, or uttering a word.
It is a moral teething; and I grind with greater energy in proportion to the increase of pain.”

“Do you understand what the word pity means?” I said, hastening to resume my bonnet.
“Well, Nelly,” said he, riding into the yard one morning, too early not to alarm me with an instant presentiment of bad news, “it’s yours and my turn to go into mourning at present.
He maintained a hard, careless deportment, indicative of neither joy nor sorrow: if anything, it expressed a flinty gratification at a piece of difficult work successfully executed.
Edgar had not the heart to pass it; so she received as constantly the answer, “Not yet, love: not yet.”

I said Mrs. Heathcliff lived above a dozen years after quitting her husband.
I used to send her on her travels round the grounds—now on foot, and now on a pony; indulging her with a patient audience of all her real and imaginary adventures when she returned.
Are you Linton?”

The youth stepped forward, and acknowledged himself: she kissed him fervently, and they gazed with wonder at the change time had wrought in the appearance of each.
Poor Cathy, frightened from her little romance, had been considerably sadder and duller since its abandonment; and her father insisted on her reading less, and taking more exercise.
It was a close, sultry day: devoid of sunshine, but with a sky too dappled and hazy to threaten rain: and our place of meeting had been fixed at the guide-stone, by the cross-roads.
I seated myself in a chair, and rocked to and fro, passing harsh judgment on my many derelictions of duty; from which, it struck me then, all the misfortunes of my employers sprang.
“If you strike me, Hareton will strike you,” she said; “so you may as well sit down.”

“If Hareton does not turn you out of the room, I’ll strike him to hell,” thundered Heathcliff.
At last the guard returned; once more I was stowed away in the coach, my protector mounted his own seat, sounded his hollow horn, and away we rattled over the “stony street” of L——.
“I meant to give each of you some of this to take with you,” said she, “but as there is so little toast, you must have it now,” and she proceeded to cut slices with a generous hand.
I remained an inmate of its walls, after its regeneration, for eight years: six as pupil, and two as teacher; and in both capacities I bear my testimony to its value and importance.
You would say you don’t see it; at least I flatter myself I read as much in your eye (beware, by-the-bye, what you express with that organ; I am quick at interpreting its language).
While talking to you, I have also occasionally watched Adèle (I have my own reasons for thinking her a curious study,—reasons that I may, nay, that I shall, impart to you some day).
Like it if you dare!’

“‘I will like it,’ said I; ‘I dare like it;’ and” (he subjoined moodily) “I will keep my word; I will break obstacles to happiness, to goodness—yes, goodness.
But I believed that his moodiness, his harshness, and his former faults of morality (I say former, for now he seemed corrected of them) had their source in some cruel cross of fate.
‘Put it,’ she said, ‘on the fourth finger of my left hand, and I am yours, and you are mine; and we shall leave earth, and make our own heaven yonder.’ She nodded again at the moon.
“Take a seat and bear me company, Jane: please God, it is the last meal but one you will eat at Thornfield Hall for a long time.”

I sat down near him, but told him I could not eat.
I asked, ‘Sophie, what are you doing?’ No one answered; but a form emerged from the closet; it took the light, held it aloft, and surveyed the garments pendent from the portmanteau.
The birds were singing their last strains—

“The air was mild, the dew was balm.”

While I looked, I thought myself happy, and was surprised to find myself ere long weeping—and why?
say nothing—my heart is full of delight—my senses are entranced—let the time I marked pass in peace.”

I humoured him: the watch ticked on: he breathed fast and low: I stood silent.
Your name is Jane Eyre?”

“Of course: that was all settled before.”

“You are not, perhaps, aware that I am your namesake?—that I was christened St. John Eyre Rivers?”

“No, indeed!
Approaching the hearth, he asked, “If I was at last satisfied with housemaid’s work?” I answered by inviting him to accompany me on a general inspection of the result of my labours.
The thing was as impossible as to mould my irregular features to his correct and classic pattern, to give to my changeable green eyes the sea-blue tint and solemn lustre of his own.
The succeeding words thrilled me strangely as he spoke them: especially as I felt, by the slight, indescribable alteration in sound, that in uttering them, his eye had turned on me.
“Is Mr. Rochester living at Thornfield Hall now?” I asked, knowing, of course, what the answer would be, but yet desirous of deferring the direct question as to where he really was.
for treating H. too liberally; and swears he will reduce him to his right place—”

* * * * * *

I began to nod drowsily over the dim page: my eye wandered from manuscript to print.
Therefore, not to mention his clothes, which had seen three months’ service in mire and dust, and his thick uncombed hair, the surface of his face and hands was dismally beclouded.
She stamped her foot, wavered a moment, and then, irresistibly impelled by the naughty spirit within her, slapped me on the cheek: a stinging blow that filled both eyes with water.
Isabella, absorbed in her meditations, or a book, remained till the door opened; and it was too late to attempt an escape, which she would gladly have done had it been practicable.
It is impossible for you to be my friend and his at the same time; and I absolutely require to know which you choose.”

“I require to be let alone!” exclaimed Catherine, furiously.
Catherine perceived, as well as I did, that he held it rather a punishment, than a gratification, to endure our company; and she made no scruple of proposing, presently, to depart.
The rumour goes,” he added, in a lower tone, “that Edgar Linton is on his death-bed: perhaps they exaggerate his illness?”

“No; my master is dying,” I replied: “it is true enough.
He had the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door, without shutting it; and when he should have gone to bed, he begged to sleep with Hareton, and his petition was granted for once.
“You must tell her,” she continued, “that I would answer her letter, but I have no materials for writing: not even a book from which I might tear a leaf.”

“No books!” I exclaimed.
Nay, if it made me a king, I’d not be scorned for seeking her good-will any more.”

“It is not I who hate you, it is you who hate me!” wept Cathy, no longer disguising her trouble.
I heard the rain still beating continuously on the staircase window, and the wind howling in the grove behind the hall; I grew by degrees cold as a stone, and then my courage sank.
I was sent to Lowood to get an education; and it would be of no use going away until I have attained that object.”

“But that teacher, Miss Scatcherd, is so cruel to you?”

“Cruel?
How dared they kill him!”

Helen was talking to herself now: she had forgotten I could not very well understand her—that I was ignorant, or nearly so, of the subject she discussed.
It was too far to return to dinner, and an allowance of cold meat and bread, in the same penurious proportion observed in our ordinary meals, was served round between the services.
“I am so glad,” she continued, as she sat down opposite to me, and took the cat on her knee; “I am so glad you are come; it will be quite pleasant living here now with a companion.
You are—” He stopped, ran his eye over my dress, which, as usual, was quite simple: a black merino cloak, a black beaver bonnet; neither of them half fine enough for a lady’s-maid.
“What is it and who did it?” he asked
He listened very gravely; his face, as I went on, expressed more concern than astonishment; he did not immediately speak when I had concluded.
I presently perceived she was (what is vernacularly termed) trailing Mrs. Dent; that is, playing on her ignorance; her trail might be clever, but it was decidedly not good-natured.
I wondered what they were going to do the first evening a change of entertainment was proposed: they spoke of “playing charades,” but in my ignorance I did not understand the term.
I mused on the funeral day, the coffin, the hearse, the black train of tenants and servants—few was the number of relatives—the gaping vault, the silent church, the solemn service.
I hid my eyes, and leant my head against the stone frame of my door; but soon a slight noise near the wicket which shut in my tiny garden from the meadow beyond it made me look up.
Are her disappointment and sorrow of no interest to you?”

“Miss Oliver is ever surrounded by suitors and flatterers: in less than a month, my image will be effaced from her heart.
You had better send word, sir, that you will be there in the morning.”

But he was already in the passage, putting on his cloak; and without one objection, one murmur, he departed.
“And Rosamond Oliver?” suggested Mary, the words seeming to escape her lips involuntarily: for no sooner had she uttered them, than she made a gesture as if wishing to recall them.
If I listened to human pride, I should say no more to you of marriage with me; but I listen to my duty, and keep steadily in view my first aim—to do all things to the glory of God.
But in his countenance I saw a change: that looked desperate and brooding—that reminded me of some wronged and fettered wild beast or bird, dangerous to approach in his sullen woe.
I set it on the table; then patted him, and said softly, “Lie down!” Mr. Rochester turned mechanically to see what the commotion was: but as he saw nothing, he returned and sighed.
Hindley and Cathy contented themselves with looking and listening till peace was restored: then, both began searching their father’s pockets for the presents he had promised them.
They entirely refused to have it in bed with them, or even in their room; and I had no more sense, so I put it on the landing of the stairs, hoping it might be gone on the morrow.
“Heathcliff, you may come forward,” cried Mr. Hindley, enjoying his discomfiture, and gratified to see what a forbidding young blackguard he would be compelled to present himself.
Should the meanest thing alive slap me on the cheek, I’d not only turn the other, but I’d ask pardon for provoking it; and, as a proof, I’ll go make my peace with Edgar instantly.
I wanted something to happen which might have the effect of freeing both Wuthering Heights and the Grange of Mr. Heathcliff quietly; leaving us as we had been prior to his advent.
Let me look.”

“Give over with that baby-work!” I interrupted, dragging the pillow away, and turning the holes towards the mattress, for she was removing its contents by handfuls.
In passing the garden to reach the road, at a place where a bridle hook is driven into the wall, I saw something white moved irregularly, evidently by another agent than the wind.
The period of reflection succeeding this silly action compelled me to admit the necessity of smothering my pride and choking my wrath, and bestirring myself to remove its effects.
Only, Catherine, do me this justice: believe that if I might be as sweet, and as kind, and as good as you are, I would be; as willingly, and more so, than as happy and as healthy.
“A letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the Grange,” I answered; annoyed at her exposing my kind deed, and fearful lest it should be imagined a missive of my own.
“I’d rayther, by th’ haulf, hev’ ’em swearing i’ my lugs fro’h morn to neeght, nor hearken ye hahsiver!” said the tenant of the kitchen, in answer to an unheard speech of Nelly’s.
Catherine leaned her head and arms on the table, till she heard the slight rustle of the covering being removed; then she stole away, and quietly seated herself beside her cousin.
CHAPTER III
The next thing I remember is, waking up with a feeling as if I had had a frightful nightmare, and seeing before me a terrible red glare, crossed with thick black bars.
Had he treated you as an especial favourite, you would have found enemies, declared or covert, all around you; as it is, the greater number would offer you sympathy if they dared.
I learned the first two tenses of the verb Etre, and sketched my first cottage (whose walls, by-the-bye, outrivalled in slope those of the leaning tower of Pisa), on the same day.
It was a fine autumn morning; the early sun shone serenely on embrowned groves and still green fields; advancing on to the lawn, I looked up and surveyed the front of the mansion.
The incident had occurred and was gone for me: it was an incident of no moment, no romance, no interest in a sense; yet it marked with change one single hour of a monotonous life.
Adèle is a degree better, but still far below the mark; Mrs. Fairfax ditto; you, I am persuaded, can suit me if you will: you puzzled me the first evening I invited you down here.
I had not, it seems, the originality to chalk out a new road to shame and destruction, but trode the old track with stupid exactness not to deviate an inch from the beaten centre.
Well, I must go in now; and you too: it darkens.”

But I stayed out a few minutes longer with Adèle and Pilot—ran a race with her, and played a game of battledore and shuttlecock.
When the evening was far advanced, a sound of music issued from the drawing-room, whither the piano had been removed; Adèle and I sat down on the top step of the stairs to listen.
Such should be my device, were I a man.”

“Whenever I marry,” she continued after a pause which none interrupted, “I am resolved my husband shall not be a rival, but a foil to me.
I wonder what other bridegroom ever looked as he did—so bent up to a purpose, so grimly resolute: or who, under such steadfast brows, ever revealed such flaming and flashing eyes.
Probably those damp walls would soon have eased me of her charge: but to each villain his own vice; and mine is not a tendency to indirect assassination, even of what I most hate.
I was mightily refreshed by the beverage; as much so as a giant with wine: it gave new tone to my unstrung nerves, and enabled me to address this penetrating young judge steadily.
The sternest-seeming stoic is human after all; and to “burst” with boldness and good-will into “the silent sea” of their souls is often to confer on them the first of obligations.
The pillow was burning: there is an asp in the garland: the wine has a bitter taste: her promises are hollow—her offers false: I see and know all this.”

I gazed at him in wonder.
How very easily alarmed you are!” he answered, removing his cloak and hanging it up against the door, towards which he again coolly pushed the mat which his entrance had deranged.
I had long felt with pleasure that many of my rustic scholars liked me, and when we parted, that consciousness was confirmed: they manifested their affection plainly and strongly.
Let me hope my constitution is almost peculiar: my dear mother used to say I should never have a comfortable home; and only last summer I proved myself perfectly unworthy of one.
Then it flashed upon me—“The clown at my elbow, who is drinking his tea out of a basin and eating his bread with unwashed hands, may be her husband: Heathcliff junior, of course.
“And you, you worthless—” he broke out as I entered, turning to his daughter-in-law, and employing an epithet as harmless as duck, or sheep, but generally represented by a dash—.
I am interested in every character you have mentioned, more or less.”

“The clock is on the stroke of eleven, sir.”

“No matter—I’m not accustomed to go to bed in the long hours.
There he tore off the sleeve of Earnshaw’s coat, and bound up the wound with brutal roughness; spitting and cursing during the operation as energetically as he had kicked before.
“Aha!” she cried, “you take papa’s side, Ellen: you are partial I know; or else you wouldn’t have cheated me so many years into the notion that Linton lived a long way from here.
Next day it all came out, sadly to my chagrin; and still I was not altogether sorry: I thought the burden of directing and warning would be more efficiently borne by him than me.
Her father sat reading at the table; and I, on purpose, had sought a bit of work in some unripped fringes of the window-curtain, keeping my eye steadily fixed on her proceedings.
CHAPTER XXX
I have paid a visit to the Heights, but I have not seen her since she left: Joseph held the door in his hand when I called to ask after her, and wouldn’t let me pass.
The present Catherine has no other likeness to her, except a breadth of forehead, and a certain arch of the nostril that makes her appear rather haughty, whether she will or not.
Ere long, I became aware that some one was handling me; lifting me up and supporting me in a sitting posture, and that more tenderly than I had ever been raised or upheld before.
“Humility is a Christian grace, and one peculiarly appropriate to the pupils of Lowood; I, therefore, direct that especial care shall be bestowed on its cultivation amongst them.
After a long silence, she resumed, still whispering—

“I am very happy, Jane; and when you hear that I am dead, you must be sure and not grieve: there is nothing to grieve about.
I had given in allegiance to duty and order; I was quiet; I believed I was content: to the eyes of others, usually even to my own, I appeared a disciplined and subdued character.
Mr. Rochester must have been aware of the entrance of Mrs. Fairfax and myself; but it appeared he was not in the mood to notice us, for he never lifted his head as we approached.
Thanks to it, I was able to meet subsequent occurrences with a decent calm, which, had they found me unprepared, I should probably have been unequal to maintain, even externally.
I must show her into a room by herself, and then those who wish to consult her must go to her one by one.”

“You see now, my queenly Blanche,” began Lady Ingram, “she encroaches.
Still you are miserable; for hope has quitted you on the very confines of life: your sun at noon darkens in an eclipse, which you feel will not leave it till the time of setting.
I did what human beings do instinctively when they are driven to utter extremity—looked for aid to one higher than man: the words “God help me!” burst involuntarily from my lips.
I could see clearly a room with a sanded floor, clean scoured; a dresser of walnut, with pewter plates ranged in rows, reflecting the redness and radiance of a glowing peat-fire.
Some of the best people that ever lived have been as destitute as I am; and if you are a Christian, you ought not to consider poverty a crime.”

“No more I ought,” said she: “Mr.
Would I sketch a portrait of her, to show to papa?”

“With pleasure,” I replied; and I felt a thrill of artist-delight at the idea of copying from so perfect and radiant a model.
They could not every day sit so grim and taciturn; and it was impossible, however ill-tempered they might be, that the universal scowl they wore was their every-day countenance.
She returned presently, bringing a smoking basin and a basket of work; and, having placed the former on the hob, drew in her seat, evidently pleased to find me so companionable.
It struck me soon, however, there would be more sense in endeavouring to repair some of his wrongs than shedding tears over them: I got up and walked into the court to seek him.
I lifted Hareton in my arms, and walked off to the kitchen with him, leaving the door of communication open, for I was curious to watch how they would settle their disagreement.
He stood on the hearth with folded arms, brooding on his evil thoughts; and in this position I left them to seek the master, who was wondering what kept Catherine below so long.
Tossing about, she increased her feverish bewilderment to madness, and tore the pillow with her teeth; then raising herself up all burning, desired that I would open the window.
I suppose we shall have plenty of lamentations now—I see we shall—but they can’t keep me from my narrow home out yonder: my resting-place, where I’m bound before spring is over!
As I sat nursing these reflections, the casement behind me was banged on to the floor by a blow from the latter individual, and his black countenance looked blightingly through.
Linton’s looks and movements were very languid, and his form extremely slight; but there was a grace in his manner that mitigated these defects, and rendered him not unpleasing.
He’s coming.” And he clung to Catherine’s arm, striving to detain her; but at that announcement she hastily disengaged herself, and whistled to Minny, who obeyed her like a dog.
I don’t like to think so; but she’s a naughty thing for crying continually; and she looks so pale and wild, I’m afraid of her.”

“And you can get the key if you choose?” I said.
it is Green,” I said, recollecting myself—“only Green,” and I went on, intending to send somebody else to open it; but the knock was repeated: not loud, and still importunately.
If, therefore, the authorship of other works of fiction has been attributed to me, an honour is awarded where it is not merited; and consequently, denied where it is justly due.
I mounted into the window-seat: gathering up my feet, I sat cross-legged, like a Turk; and, having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close, I was shrined in double retirement.
Children can feel, but they cannot analyse their feelings; and if the analysis is partially effected in thought, they know not how to express the result of the process in words.
Helen Burns asked some slight question about her work of Miss Smith, was chidden for the triviality of the inquiry, returned to her place, and smiled at me as she again went by.
Beyond and above spread an expanse of sky, dark blue as at twilight: rising into the sky was a woman’s shape to the bust, portrayed in tints as dusk and soft as I could combine.
Now, when any vicious simpleton excites my disgust by his paltry ribaldry, I cannot flatter myself that I am better than he: I am forced to confess that he and I are on a level.
I believed he was naturally a man of better tendencies, higher principles, and purer tastes than such as circumstances had developed, education instilled, or destiny encouraged.
Ere long, steps retreated up the gallery towards the third-storey staircase: a door had lately been made to shut in that staircase; I heard it open and close, and all was still.
She was dressed in pure white; an amber-coloured scarf was passed over her shoulder and across her breast, tied at the side, and descending in long, fringed ends below her knee.
Her purple riding-habit almost swept the ground, her veil streamed long on the breeze; mingling with its transparent folds, and gleaming through them, shone rich raven ringlets.
I almost wondered they did not check their songs and whispers to catch the suspended revelation; but they would have had to wait many minutes—so long was the silence protracted.
“You shall go into the breakfast-room first,” said Bessie, as she preceded me through the hall; “the young ladies will be there.”

In another moment I was within that apartment.
I took a plain but clean and light summer dress from my drawer and put it on: it seemed no attire had ever so well become me, because none had I ever worn in so blissful a mood.
“Would I be quiet and talk rationally?”

“I would be quiet if he liked, and as to talking rationally, I flattered myself I was doing that now.”

He fretted, pished, and pshawed.
I noticed them, because, as they saw us, they passed round to the back of the church; and I doubted not they were going to enter by the side-aisle door and witness the ceremony.
Just put your hand in mine, Janet—that I may have the evidence of touch as well as sight, to prove you are near me—and I will in a few words show you the real state of the case.
Papa told me you had opened your school, and that the new mistress was come; and so I put on my bonnet after tea, and ran up the valley to see her: this is she?” pointing to me.
What struggle there was in him between Nature and Grace in this interval, I cannot tell: only singular gleams scintillated in his eyes, and strange shadows passed over his face.
He lifted his hand and opened his eyelids; gazed blank, and with a straining effort, on the sky, and toward the amphitheatre of trees: one saw that all to him was void darkness.
“It is time some one undertook to rehumanise you,” said I, parting his thick and long uncut locks; “for I see you are being metamorphosed into a lion, or something of that sort.
By his knack of sermonising and pious discoursing, he contrived to make a great impression on Mr. Earnshaw; and the more feeble the master became, the more influence he gained.
What she was, and where she was born, he never informed us: probably, she had neither money nor name to recommend her, or he would scarcely have kept the union from his father.
Nobody but I even did him the kindness to call him a dirty boy, and bid him wash himself, once a week; and children of his age seldom have a natural pleasure in soap and water.
He went down: I set him a stool by the fire, and offered him a quantity of good things: but he was sick and could eat little, and my attempts to entertain him were thrown away.
You’re worse than a heathen—treating your own flesh and blood in that manner!” He attempted to touch the child, who, on finding himself with me, sobbed off his terror directly.
His young and fair features were almost as deathlike as those of the form beside him, and almost as fixed: but his was the hush of exhausted anguish, and hers of perfect peace.
“It is not so buried in trees,” I replied, “and it is not quite so large, but you can see the country beautifully all round; and the air is healthier for you—fresher and drier.
The moon shone bright; a sprinkling of snow covered the ground, and I reflected that she might, possibly, have taken it into her head to walk about the garden, for refreshment.
CHAPTER XXVI
Summer was already past its prime, when Edgar reluctantly yielded his assent to their entreaties, and Catherine and I set out on our first ride to join her cousin.
“We will go!” she repeated, exerting her utmost efforts to cause the iron muscles to relax; and finding that her nails made no impression, she applied her teeth pretty sharply.
It was a very grey day; a most opaque sky, “onding on snaw,” canopied all; thence flakes fell at intervals, which settled on the hard path and on the hoary lea without melting.
When I awoke it was day: an unusual movement roused me; I looked up; I was in somebody’s arms; the nurse held me; she was carrying me through the passage back to the dormitory.
It was three storeys high, of proportions not vast, though considerable: a gentleman’s manor-house, not a nobleman’s seat: battlements round the top gave it a picturesque look.
“Now I have performed the part of a good host,” pursued Mr. Rochester, “put my guests into the way of amusing each other, I ought to be at liberty to attend to my own pleasure.
“Vos doigts tremblent comme la feuille, et vos joues sont rouges: mais, rouges comme des cerises!”

“I am hot, Adèle, with stooping!” She went on sketching; I went on thinking.
I allowed Adèle to sit up much later than usual; for she declared she could not possibly go to sleep while the doors kept opening and shutting below, and people bustling about.
Why had the mere name of this unresisting individual—whom his word now sufficed to control like a child—fallen on him, a few hours since, as a thunderbolt might fall on an oak?
The hue of her dress was black too; but its fashion was so different from her sister’s—so much more flowing and becoming—it looked as stylish as the other’s looked puritanical.
The evening arrival at the great town of —— scattered these thoughts; night gave them quite another turn: laid down on my traveller’s bed, I left reminiscence for anticipation.
Read on: only make haste, for I suffer.”

His face was very much agitated and very much flushed, and there were strong workings in the features, and strange gleams in the eyes.
The light that long ago had struck me into syncope, recalled in this vision, seemed glidingly to mount the wall, and tremblingly to pause in the centre of the obscured ceiling.
To live amidst general regard, though it be but the regard of working people, is like “sitting in sunshine, calm and sweet;” serene inward feelings bud and bloom under the ray.
“No; that does not satisfy me!” I exclaimed: and indeed there was something in the hasty and unexplanatory reply which, instead of allaying, piqued my curiosity more than ever.
I might have said, “Where is it?” for it did not seem in the room—nor in the house—nor in the garden; it did not come out of the air—nor from under the earth—nor from overhead.
“I see I have the means of fretting him out of his melancholy for some time to come.”

Very early the next morning I heard him up and astir, wandering from one room to another.
Well, then, I must trust to my own sagacity.”

“Umph!”

“Are you going to mak’ the tea?” demanded he of the shabby coat, shifting his ferocious gaze from me to the young lady.
He noticed this, and thrust at an inner door with the end of his spade, intimating by an inarticulate sound that there was the place where I must go, if I changed my locality.
At any rate, whatever were my wanderings, the clock chimed twelve as I entered the house; and that gave exactly an hour for every mile of the usual way from Wuthering Heights.
Isabella Linton is not to be compared with her, is she, Frances?” “Isabella has not her natural advantages,” replied his wife: “but she must mind and not grow wild again here.
“Here’s to its hearty damnation!”

He drank the spirits and impatiently bade us go; terminating his command with a sequel of horrid imprecations too bad to repeat or remember.
There were no mutual concessions: one stood erect, and the others yielded: and who can be ill-natured and bad-tempered when they encounter neither opposition nor indifference?
Hindley is too reckless to select his acquaintance prudently: he doesn’t trouble himself to reflect on the causes he might have for mistrusting one whom he has basely injured.
It was kindness for him which induced me to bear it alone: had I expressed the agony I frequently felt, he would have been taught to long for its alleviation as ardently as I.
she and Heathcliff were walking in the plantation at the back of your house above two hours; and he pressed her not to go in again, but just mount his horse and away with him!
Wouldn’t it be wiser to bid him quit the house?”

“No!” thundered Earnshaw; “should he offer to leave me, he’s a dead man: persuade him to attempt it, and you are a murderess!
For the rest, after the first six months, she grew like a larch, and could walk and talk too, in her own way, before the heath blossomed a second time over Mrs. Linton’s dust.
To live all these years such close neighbours, and never see us, is odd: what have you done so for?”

“I visited it once or twice too often before you were born,” he answered.
You’re in no danger; but if you hinder me—Linton, I love papa better than you!” The mortal terror he felt of Mr. Heathcliff’s anger restored to the boy his coward’s eloquence.
We were in April then: the weather was sweet and warm, the grass as green as showers and sun could make it, and the two dwarf apple-trees near the southern wall in full bloom.
“Come now,” I exclaimed, pushing some bread against his hand, “eat and drink that, while it is hot: it has been waiting near an hour.”

He didn’t notice me, and yet he smiled.
It was the hardest battle I had fought, and the first victory I had gained: I stood awhile on the rug, where Mr. Brocklehurst had stood, and I enjoyed my conqueror’s solitude.
As yet I had spoken to no one, nor did anybody seem to take notice of me; I stood lonely enough: but to that feeling of isolation I was accustomed; it did not oppress me much.
In turning a leaf she happened to look up, and I said to her directly—

“Is your book interesting?” I had already formed the intention of asking her to lend it to me some day.
I had not a very large wardrobe, though it was adequate to my wants; and the last day sufficed to pack my trunk,—the same I had brought with me eight years ago from Gateshead.
“A matter of six miles.”

“How long shall we be before we get there?”

“Happen an hour and a half.”

He fastened the car door, climbed to his own seat outside, and we set off.
I meditated wonderingly on this incident; but gradually quitting it, as I found it for the present inexplicable, I turned to the consideration of my master’s manner to myself.
It seemed Mrs. Dent had not studied that science: though, as she said, she liked flowers, “especially wild ones;” Miss Ingram had, and she ran over its vocabulary with an air.
“I am very well, sir.”

“Why did you not come and speak to me in the room?”

I thought I might have retorted the question on him who put it: but I would not take that freedom.
“If you please, miss, the gipsy declares that there is another young single lady in the room who has not been to her yet, and she swears she will not go till she has seen all.
My friend would then turn to me, quiet and pale, and would say, ‘No, sir; that is impossible: I cannot do it, because it is wrong;’ and would become immutable as a fixed star.
There was every article of furniture looking just as it did on the morning I was first introduced to Mr. Brocklehurst: the very rug he had stood upon still covered the hearth.
Your habitual expression in those days, Jane, was a thoughtful look; not despondent, for you were not sickly; but not buoyant, for you had little hope, and no actual pleasure.
Not a tie holds me to human society at this moment—not a charm or hope calls me where my fellow-creatures are—none that saw me would have a kind thought or a good wish for me.
I hold that the more arid and unreclaimed the soil where the Christian labourer’s task of tillage is appointed him—the scantier the meed his toil brings—the higher the honour.
On the contrary, I think in time I shall get on with my scholars very well.”

“But perhaps your accommodations—your cottage—your furniture—have disappointed your expectations?
They laughed—kissed me—then Hannah: patted Carlo, who was half wild with delight; asked eagerly if all was well; and being assured in the affirmative, hastened into the house.
John,” I returned, “I regard you as a brother—you, me as a sister: so let us continue.”

“We cannot—we cannot,” he answered, with short, sharp determination: “it would not do.
“Yes: he always has candles brought in at dark, though he is blind.”

“Give the tray to me; I will carry it in.”

I took it from her hand: she pointed me out the parlour door.
He loved me so truly, that he knew no reluctance in profiting by my attendance: he felt I loved him so fondly, that to yield that attendance was to indulge my sweetest wishes.
He may be stern; he may be exacting; he may be ambitious yet; but his is the sternness of the warrior Greatheart, who guards his pilgrim convoy from the onslaught of Apollyon.
Drag him down, and crush him to atoms, that the place which knows him may know him no more!”

“Thou art the Man!” cried Jabez, after a solemn pause, leaning over his cushion.
Why did you speak to him, Edgar?”

“I didn’t,” sobbed the youth, escaping from my hands, and finishing the remainder of the purification with his cambric pocket-handkerchief.
I let the poor things converse unmolested, till I supposed the songs were going to cease, and the singers to get some refreshment: then I clambered up the ladder to warn her.
I like her too well, my dear Heathcliff, to let you absolutely seize and devour her up.”

“And I like her too ill to attempt it,” said he, “except in a very ghoulish fashion.
Quarrel with Edgar, if you please, Heathcliff, and deceive his sister: you’ll hit on exactly the most efficient method of revenging yourself on me.”

The conversation ceased.
One of the maids, a thoughtless girl, who had been on an early errand to Gimmerton, came panting upstairs, open-mouthed, and dashed into the chamber, crying: “Oh, dear, dear!
I sometimes wonder at him with an intensity that deadens my fear: yet, I assure you, a tiger or a venomous serpent could not rouse terror in me equal to that which he wakens.
“The doleful silence was broken at length by the sound of the kitchen latch: Heathcliff had returned from his watch earlier than usual; owing, I suppose, to the sudden storm.
His features were pretty yet, and his eye and complexion brighter than I remembered them, though with merely temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air and genial sun.
I can hardly understand him, I’m sure!”

Linton repeated his laugh, and glanced at Hareton tauntingly; who certainly did not seem quite clear of comprehension at that moment.
Mr. Heathcliff you have nobody to love you; and, however miserable you make us, we shall still have the revenge of thinking that your cruelty arises from your greater misery.
They lifted their eyes together, to encounter Mr. Heathcliff: perhaps you have never remarked that their eyes are precisely similar, and they are those of Catherine Earnshaw.
I say scarcely voluntary, for it seemed as if my tongue pronounced words without my will consenting to their utterance: something spoke out of me over which I had no control.
I expected she would show signs of great distress and shame; but to my surprise she neither wept nor blushed: composed, though grave, she stood, the central mark of all eyes.
I wonder what sort of a girl she is—whether good or naughty.”

Soon after five P.M. we had another meal, consisting of a small mug of coffee, and half-a-slice of brown bread.
I observed you in your class this morning, and saw you were closely attentive: your thoughts never seemed to wander while Miss Miller explained the lesson and questioned you.
The idea struck me that if she discovered I knew or suspected her guilt, she would be playing of some of her malignant pranks on me; I thought it advisable to be on my guard.
If she objects, tell her it is my particular wish; and if she resists, say I shall come and fetch her in case of contumacy.’”

“I will not give him that trouble,” I answered.
Oh, had you but lived a few years earlier, what a gallant gentleman-highwayman you would have made!”

“Is all the soot washed from my face?” he asked, turning it towards her.
She was three days without speaking; but last Tuesday she seemed rather better: she appeared as if she wanted to say something, and kept making signs to my wife and mumbling.
Seeing me, she roused herself: she made a sort of effort to smile, and framed a few words of congratulation; but the smile expired, and the sentence was abandoned unfinished.
You shall see what sort of a being I was cheated into espousing, and judge whether or not I had a right to break the compact, and seek sympathy with something at least human.
Your uncle, I am sorry to say, is now on a sick bed; from which, considering the nature of his disease—decline—and the stage it has reached, it is unlikely he will ever rise.
Amongst them all I found not one whom, had I been ever so free, I—warned as I was of the risks, the horrors, the loathings of incongruous unions—would have asked to marry me.
Yet a chance traveller might pass by; and I wish no eye to see me now: strangers would wonder what I am doing, lingering here at the sign-post, evidently objectless and lost.
A few strange, antique portraits of the men and women of other days decorated the stained walls; a cupboard with glass doors contained some books and an ancient set of china.
Mr. St. John—sitting as still as one of the dusty pictures on the walls, keeping his eyes fixed on the page he perused, and his lips mutely sealed—was easy enough to examine.
From that moment my state of mind changed; the fetters dissolved and dropped from every faculty, leaving nothing of bondage but its galling soreness—which time only can heal.
“It is useless to attempt to conciliate you: I see I have made an eternal enemy of you.”

A fresh wrong did these words inflict: the worse, because they touched on the truth.
“She got steeped in the shower of yesterday evening, and there she has sat the night through, and I couldn’t prevail on her to stir.”

Mr. Earnshaw stared at us in surprise.
nip up and bolt into th’ house, t’ minute yah heard t’ maister’s horse-fit clatter up t’ road.”

“Silence, eavesdropper!” cried Catherine; “none of your insolence before me!
The voice has no resemblance to his.”

“I have waited here an hour,” he resumed, while I continued staring; “and the whole of that time all round has been as still as death.
Therefore I said nothing when I met the master coming towards the parlour; but I took the liberty of turning back to listen whether they would resume their quarrel together.
Last night I was in the Grange garden six hours, and I’ll return there to-night; and every night I’ll haunt the place, and every day, till I find an opportunity of entering.
Notwithstanding, my journey homeward was sadder than my journey thither; and many misgivings I had, ere I could prevail on myself to put the missive into Mrs. Linton’s hand.
They may reckon on that!”

Fortunately its mother died before the time arrived; some thirteen years after the decease of Catherine, when Linton was twelve, or a little more.
When his ship struck, the captain abandoned his post; and the crew, instead of trying to save her, rushed into riot and confusion, leaving no hope for their luckless vessel.
Did I ever look so stupid: so ‘gaumless,’ as Joseph calls it?”

“Worse,” I replied, “because more sullen with it.”

“I’ve a pleasure in him,” he continued, reflecting aloud.
But the return was no such easy matter: the stones were smooth and neatly cemented, and the rose-bushes and black-berry stragglers could yield no assistance in re-ascending.
His lack of interest in the subjects she started, and his equal incapacity to contribute to her entertainment, were so obvious that she could not conceal her disappointment.
We had not yet lighted a candle, but all the apartment was visible, even to the portraits on the wall: the splendid head of Mrs. Linton, and the graceful one of her husband.
Heathcliff fixed Catherine’s arm under his: though she disputed the act at first evidently; and with rapid strides he hurried her into the alley, whose trees concealed them.
The front door stood open, but the jealous gate was fastened, as at my last visit; I knocked and invoked Earnshaw from among the garden-beds; he unchained it, and I entered.
Finally, I have alluded to Mr. Thackeray, because to him—if he will accept the tribute of a total stranger—I have dedicated this second edition of “JANE EYRE.”

CURRER BELL.
Miss Abbot joined in—

“And you ought not to think yourself on an equality with the Misses Reed and Master Reed, because Missis kindly allows you to be brought up with them.
angels sing Psalms;’ says he, ‘I wish to be a little angel here below;’ he then gets two nuts in recompense for his infant piety.”

“Psalms are not interesting,” I remarked.
The first was a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and a pale and large forehead; her figure was partly enveloped in a shawl, her countenance was grave, her bearing erect.
“I suppose, Miss Temple, the thread I bought at Lowton will do; it struck me that it would be just of the quality for the calico chemises, and I sorted the needles to match.
A phase of my life was closing to-night, a new one opening to-morrow: impossible to slumber in the interval; I must watch feverishly while the change was being accomplished.
I rose; I dressed myself with care: obliged to be plain—for I had no article of attire that was not made with extreme simplicity—I was still by nature solicitous to be neat.
From my seat I could look down on Thornfield: the grey and battlemented hall was the principal object in the vale below me; its woods and dark rookery rose against the west.
Sinking below the bird and mast, a drowned corpse glanced through the green water; a fair arm was the only limb clearly visible, whence the bracelet had been washed or torn.
I should have liked something clearer; but Mrs. Fairfax either could not, or would not, give me more explicit information of the origin and nature of Mr. Rochester’s trials.
I have almost forgotten you since: other ideas have driven yours from my head; but to-night I am resolved to be at ease; to dismiss what importunes, and recall what pleases.
Seulement pour completer ma toilette.”

“You think too much of your ‘toilette,’ Adèle: but you may have a flower.” And I took a rose from a vase and fastened it in her sash.
“As to the mouth, it delights at times in laughter; it is disposed to impart all that the brain conceives; though I daresay it would be silent on much the heart experiences.
“Be composed, all of you: I’m coming.”

And the door at the end of the gallery opened, and Mr. Rochester advanced with a candle: he had just descended from the upper storey.
Mr. Rochester let him sit three minutes after he had swallowed the liquid; he then took his arm—

“Now I am sure you can get on your feet,” he said—“try.”

The patient rose.
I took care that none should hear of it—or of her under that name.” He mused—for ten minutes he held counsel with himself: he formed his resolve, and announced it—

“Enough!
I found estimable characters amongst them—characters desirous of information and disposed for improvement—with whom I passed many a pleasant evening hour in their own homes.
One morning at breakfast, Diana, after looking a little pensive for some minutes, asked him, “If his plans were yet unchanged.”

“Unchanged and unchangeable,” was the reply.
He and I were the only occupants of the parlour: Diana was practising her music in the drawing-room, Mary was gardening—it was a very fine May day, clear, sunny, and breezy.
“No wonder the grass grows up between the flags, and cattle are the only hedge-cutters.”

Joseph was an elderly, nay, an old man, very old, perhaps, though hale and sinewy.
“Seventy times seven times didst thou gapingly contort thy visage—seventy times seven did I take counsel with my soul—Lo, this is human weakness: this also may be absolved!
The little monkey had crept by the skylight of one garret, along the roof, into the skylight of the other, and it was with the utmost difficulty I could coax her out again.
You need not be afraid of harming him: though I hate him as much as ever, he did me a good turn a short time since that will make my conscience tender of breaking his neck.
Not to grieve a kind master, I learned to be less touchy; and, for the space of half a year, the gunpowder lay as harmless as sand, because no fire came near to explode it.
I tell you, I have such faith in Linton’s love, that I believe I might kill him, and he wouldn’t wish to retaliate.”

I advised her to value him the more for his affection.
CHAPTER XIII
For two months the fugitives remained absent; in those two months, Mrs. Linton encountered and conquered the worst shock of what was denominated a brain fever.
You may call at Wuthering Heights this afternoon, if you like, and say that I am not angry, but I’m sorry to have lost her; especially as I can never think she’ll be happy.
“I recovered spirits sufficient to bear Joseph’s eternal lectures without weeping, and to move up and down the house less with the foot of a frightened thief than formerly.
Hathecliff maks noa ’count o’ t’ mother, nor ye norther; but he’ll heu’ his lad; und I mun tak’ him—soa now ye knaw!”

“You shall not to-night!” answered Linton decisively.
I’d rather stay with uncle.”

“He lives a little distance from the Grange,” I replied; “just beyond those hills: not so far, but you may walk over here when you get hearty.
If you have any kisses to spare, give them to Linton: they are thrown away on me.”

“Naughty Ellen!” exclaimed Catherine, flying to attack me next with her lavish caresses.
And I must tell Linton it is not my fault that I don’t write, and convince him that I shall not change.”

What use were anger and protestations against her silly credulity?
He followed my example, and left the room; but presently reappeared, bearing half a dozen volumes in his hands, which he threw into Catherine’s lap, exclaiming,—“Take them!
“I’m the only person to blame, for I wished him to do it.”

“And who the devil gave you leave to touch a stick about the place?” demanded her father-in-law, much surprised.
Afar, it offered a pale blank of mist and cloud; near a scene of wet lawn and storm-beat shrub, with ceaseless rain sweeping away wildly before a long and lamentable blast.
CHAPTER II
I resisted all the way: a new thing for me, and a circumstance which greatly strengthened the bad opinion Bessie and Miss Abbot were disposed to entertain of me.
Here she comes, with her ‘bonne,’ as she calls her nurse.” The enigma then was explained: this affable and kind little widow was no great dame; but a dependent like myself.
I don’t think she can ever have been pretty; but, for aught I know, she may possess originality and strength of character to compensate for the want of personal advantages.
And then she had such a fine head of hair; raven-black and so becomingly arranged: a crown of thick plaits behind, and in front the longest, the glossiest curls I ever saw.
Listen!”

In listening, I sobbed convulsively; for I could repress what I endured no longer; I was obliged to yield, and I was shaken from head to foot with acute distress.
There was a light in the dressing-table, and the door of the closet, where, before going to bed, I had hung my wedding-dress and veil, stood open; I heard a rustling there.
“You, madam,” said he, “are cleared from all blame: your uncle will be glad to hear it—if, indeed, he should be still living—when Mr. Mason returns to Madeira.”

“My uncle!
And I could not rid myself of it by any legal proceedings: for the doctors now discovered that my wife was mad—her excesses had prematurely developed the germs of insanity.
Hiring a mistress is the next worse thing to buying a slave: both are often by nature, and always by position, inferior: and to live familiarly with inferiors is degrading.
Quiescent as he now sat, there was something about his nostril, his mouth, his brow, which, to my perceptions, indicated elements within either restless, or hard, or eager.
Of the ambition to win power and renown for my wretched self, she has formed the ambition to spread my Master’s kingdom; to achieve victories for the standard of the cross.
(I have seen their grave; it formed part of the pavement of a huge churchyard surrounding the grim, soot-black old cathedral of an overgrown manufacturing town in ——shire.)
“My mother’s name was Eyre; she had two brothers; one a clergyman, who married Miss Jane Reed, of Gateshead; the other, John Eyre, Esq., merchant, late of Funchal, Madeira.
They were stiff with their long and jolting drive from Whitcross, and chilled with the frosty night air; but their pleasant countenances expanded to the cheerful firelight.
While earnestly wishing to erase from his mind the trace of my former offence, I had stamped on that tenacious surface another and far deeper impression: I had burnt it in.
Mr. Rochester was about forty, and this governess not twenty; and you see, when gentlemen of his age fall in love with girls, they are often like as if they were bewitched.
“And what right would that ruin have to bid a budding woodbine cover its decay with freshness?”

“You are no ruin, sir—no lightning-struck tree: you are green and vigorous.
I have nothing to do with it.”

“I hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash journeys on these hills,” cried Heathcliff’s stern voice from the kitchen entrance.
It was a Testament, in lean type, and smelling dreadfully musty: a fly-leaf bore the inscription—“Catherine Earnshaw, her book,” and a date some quarter of a century back.
I had read Earnshaw twenty times for Linton)—“I’m come home: I’d lost my way on the moor!”

As it spoke, I discerned, obscurely, a child’s face looking through the window.
My presence in his sanctum was evidently esteemed a piece of impudence too shameful for remark: he silently applied the tube to his lips, folded his arms, and puffed away.
He was, and is yet most likely, the wearisomest self-righteous Pharisee that ever ransacked a Bible to rake the promises to himself and fling the curses to his neighbours.
You have pledged your word, and cannot retract.”

“But say whether I should have done so—do!” she exclaimed in an irritated tone; chafing her hands together, and frowning.
It had got dusk, and the moon looked over the high wall of the court, causing undefined shadows to lurk in the corners of the numerous projecting portions of the building.
About the middle of the night, I was wakened from my first nap by Mrs. Linton gliding into my chamber, taking a seat on my bedside, and pulling me by the hair to rouse me.
Heathcliff I should say in future—used the liberty of visiting at Thrushcross Grange cautiously, at first: he seemed estimating how far its owner would bear his intrusion.
I felt that God had forsaken the stray sheep there to its own wicked wanderings, and an evil beast prowled between it and the fold, waiting his time to spring and destroy.
My surprise and perplexity were great on discovering, by touch more than vision, Miss Isabella’s springer, Fanny, suspended by a handkerchief, and nearly at its last gasp.
I’m not going to act the lady among you, for fear I should starve.”

“Gooid Lord!” he muttered, sitting down, and stroking his ribbed stockings from the knee to the ankle.
So much had circumstances altered their positions, that he would certainly have struck a stranger as a born and bred gentleman; and his wife as a thorough little slattern!
Whatever he may pretend, he wishes to provoke Edgar to desperation: he says he has married me on purpose to obtain power over him; and he sha’n’t obtain it—I’ll die first!
Far better that she should be dead, than lingering a burden and a misery-maker to all about her.”

Edgar sprang to his unbidden guest, blanched with astonishment and rage.
“You bring the pony,” she exclaimed, turning to the woman, “and let my dog free this moment!”

“Softly, Miss,” answered she addressed; “you’ll lose nothing by being civil.
Have you noticed, Catherine, his frightful Yorkshire pronunciation?”

“Why, where the devil is the use on’t?” growled Hareton, more ready in answering his daily companion.
As we walked home, I would fain have enlightened my charge on the characters of the people we had quitted: but she got it into her head that I was prejudiced against them.
“Ellen, I’ll burn that door down but I’ll get out.”

And she would have commenced the execution of her threat directly, but Linton was up in alarm for his dear self again.
Catherine usually sat by me, but to-day she stole nearer to Hareton; and I presently saw she would have no more discretion in her friendship than she had in her hostility.
He had an aversion to yielding so completely to his feelings, choosing rather to absent himself; and eating once in twenty-four hours seemed sufficient sustenance for him.
Mrs. Reed answered for me by an expressive shake of the head, adding soon, “Perhaps the less said on that subject the better, Mr. Brocklehurst.”

“Sorry indeed to hear it!
Shaking from head to foot, thrilled with ungovernable excitement, I continued—

“I am glad you are no relation of mine: I will never call you aunt again as long as I live.
The refectory was a great, low-ceiled, gloomy room; on two long tables smoked basins of something hot, which, however, to my dismay, sent forth an odour far from inviting.
such spots are there on the disc of the clearest planet; and eyes like Miss Scatcherd’s can only see those minute defects, and are blind to the full brightness of the orb.
All this I enjoyed often and fully, free, unwatched, and almost alone: for this unwonted liberty and pleasure there was a cause, to which it now becomes my task to advert.
An odour of camphor and burnt vinegar warned me when I came near the fever room: and I passed its door quickly, fearful lest the nurse who sat up all night should hear me.
Sophie is my nurse; she came with me over the sea in a great ship with a chimney that smoked—how it did smoke!—and I was sick, and so was Sophie, and so was Mr. Rochester.
When his sprain was well enough to admit of horse exercise, he rode out a good deal; probably to return these visits, as he generally did not come back till late at night.
And now I looked much better than I did when Bessie saw me; I had more colour and more flesh, more life, more vivacity, because I had brighter hopes and keener enjoyments.
let her come into the drawing-room after dinner; and request Miss Eyre to accompany her.’”

“Yes; he said that from mere politeness: I need not go, I am sure,” I answered.
Mr. Frederick Lynn has taken a seat beside Mary Ingram, and is showing her the engravings of a splendid volume: she looks, smiles now and then, but apparently says little.
Miss Ingram, who had now seated herself with proud grace at the piano, spreading out her snowy robes in queenly amplitude, commenced a brilliant prelude; talking meantime.
“You don’t turn sick at the sight of blood?”

“I think I shall not: I have never been tried yet.”

I felt a thrill while I answered him; but no coldness, and no faintness.
It required some courage to disturb so interesting a party; my errand, however, was one I could not defer, so I approached the master where he stood at Miss Ingram’s side.
True, generous feeling is made small account of by some, but here were two natures rendered, the one intolerably acrid, the other despicably savourless for the want of it.
I am strangely glad to get back again to you: and wherever you are is my home—my only home.”

I walked on so fast that even he could hardly have overtaken me had he tried.
Is it the thoughts of going to London that takes away your appetite?”

“I cannot see my prospects clearly to-night, sir; and I hardly know what thoughts I have in my head.
I smiled as I unfolded it, and devised how I would tease you about your aristocratic tastes, and your efforts to masque your plebeian bride in the attributes of a peeress.
I put out my hand to feel the dark mass before me: I discriminated the rough stones of a low wall—above it, something like palisades, and within, a high and prickly hedge.
that’s t’ last o’ t’ old stock—for ye and Mr. St. John is like of different soart to them ’at’s gone; for all your mother wor mich i’ your way, and a’most as book-learned.
“Gone over to Morton for a walk; but they would be back in half-an-hour to tea.”

They returned within the time Hannah had allotted them: they entered by the kitchen door.
“It is well for you that a low fever has forced you to abstain for the last three days: there would have been danger in yielding to the cravings of your appetite at first.
Do come and see papa.”

“Not to-night, Miss Rosamond, not to-night.”

Mr. St. John spoke almost like an automaton: himself only knew the effort it cost him thus to refuse.
“Indeed,” cried Rosamond, “she is clever enough to be a governess in a high family, papa.”

I thought I would far rather be where I am than in any high family in the land.
You cannot fail to see that twenty thousand pounds, the sum in question, divided equally between the nephew and three nieces of our uncle, will give five thousand to each?
I suppose you are a stranger in these parts, or you would have heard what happened last autumn,—Thornfield Hall is quite a ruin: it was burnt down just about harvest-time.
Was it suspected that this lunatic, Mrs. Rochester, had any hand in it?”

“You’ve hit it, ma’am: it’s quite certain that it was her, and nobody but her, that set it going.
“This St. John, then, is your cousin?”

“Yes.”

“You have spoken of him often: do you like him?”

“He was a very good man, sir; I could not help liking him.”

“A good man.
“I’m afraid, Mrs. Heathcliff, the door must bear the consequence of your servants’ leisure attendance: I had hard work to make them hear me.”

She never opened her mouth.
“As to staying here, I don’t keep accommodations for visitors: you must share a bed with Hareton or Joseph, if you do.”

“I can sleep on a chair in this room,” I replied.
I’ve no more business to marry Edgar Linton than I have to be in heaven; and if the wicked man in there had not brought Heathcliff so low, I shouldn’t have thought of it.
I replaced it in her lap, and stood waiting till it should please her to glance down; but that movement was so long delayed that at last I resumed—“Must I read it, ma’am?
Next morning—bright and cheerful out of doors—stole softened in through the blinds of the silent room, and suffused the couch and its occupant with a mellow, tender glow.
Sit quite still and don’t talk: but you may sing a song, if you can sing; or you may say a nice long interesting ballad—one of those you promised to teach me; or a story.
And, though I’m glad he’s better in health, I’m sorry he’s so much less pleasant, and so much less affectionate to me.”

“You think he is better in health, then?” I said.
It was the same room into which he had been ushered, as a guest, eighteen years before: the same moon shone through the window; and the same autumn landscape lay outside.
In two hours, I called Joseph to carry him up again; and since then my presence is as potent on his nerves as a ghost; and I fancy he sees me often, though I am not near.
Not because I need it, but—” He turned abruptly to the fire, and continued, with what, for lack of a better word, I must call a smile—“I’ll tell you what I did yesterday!
“In the morning, he sent me to tell her she must come down to breakfast: she had undressed, and appeared going to sleep, and said she was ill; at which I hardly wondered.
The latter was speechless; his cousin replied—“You shouldn’t grudge a few yards of earth for me to ornament, when you have taken all my land!”

“Your land, insolent slut!
Scarcely less prominent was an ample cushioned easy-chair near the head of the bed, also white, with a footstool before it; and looking, as I thought, like a pale throne.
“Abbot and Bessie, I believe I gave orders that Jane Eyre should be left in the red-room till I came to her myself.”

“Miss Jane screamed so loud, ma’am,” pleaded Bessie.
Mrs. Fairfax stayed behind a moment to fasten the trap-door; I, by dint of groping, found the outlet from the attic, and proceeded to descend the narrow garret staircase.
By-the-bye, how have you got on with your new pupil this morning?”

The conversation, thus turned on Adèle, continued till we reached the light and cheerful region below.
Instead, all alone, sitting upright on the rug, and gazing with gravity at the blaze, I beheld a great black and white long-haired dog, just like the Gytrash of the lane.
Go into the library—I mean, if you please.—(Excuse my tone of command; I am used to say, ‘Do this,’ and it is done: I cannot alter my customary habits for one new inmate.
He had been looking two minutes at the fire, and I had been looking the same length of time at him, when, turning suddenly, he caught my gaze fastened on his physiognomy.
I derived benefit from the task: it had kept my head and hands employed, and had given force and fixedness to the new impressions I wished to stamp indelibly on my heart.
Of her daughters, the eldest, Amy, was rather little: naïve, and child-like in face and manner, and piquant in form; her white muslin dress and blue sash became her well.
I slipped out of the room, unobserved by any eye—for the company were gathered in one mass about the trembling trio just returned—and I closed the door quietly behind me.
She stirred the fire, so that a ripple of light broke from the disturbed coal: the glare, however, as she sat, only threw her face into deeper shadow: mine, it illumined.
I expected no one; is he gone?”

“No; he said he had known you long, and that he could take the liberty of installing himself here till you returned.”

“The devil he did!
The sleepers were all aroused: ejaculations, terrified murmurs sounded in every room; door after door unclosed; one looked out and another looked out; the gallery filled.
But I cannot give him orders in this case: I cannot say ‘Beware of harming me, Richard;’ for it is imperative that I should keep him ignorant that harm to me is possible.
CHAPTER XXIII
A splendid Midsummer shone over England: skies so pure, suns so radiant as were then seen in long succession, seldom favour even singly, our wave-girt land.
Jane, you must be reasonable, or in truth I shall again become frantic.”

His voice and hand quivered: his large nostrils dilated; his eye blazed: still I dared to speak.
Robert Brocklehurst is the treasurer.”

“I have heard of Mr. Brocklehurst, and I have seen the school.”

“I left Lowood nearly a year since to become a private governess.
In spite of his Christian stoicism, when she went up and addressed him, and smiled gaily, encouragingly, even fondly in his face, his hand would tremble and his eye burn.
I am not going out under human guidance, subject to the defective laws and erring control of my feeble fellow-worms: my king, my lawgiver, my captain, is the All-perfect.
You are much too pretty, as well as too good, to be grilled alive in Calcutta.” And again she earnestly conjured me to give up all thoughts of going out with her brother.
I busied myself for an hour or two with arranging my things in my chamber, drawers, and wardrobe, in the order wherein I should wish to leave them during a brief absence.
Take a glass of wine?”

“No, thank you.”

“Not bitten, are you?”

“If I had been, I would have set my signet on the biter.” Heathcliff’s countenance relaxed into a grin.
The canisters were almost out of her reach; I made a motion to aid her; she turned upon me as a miser might turn if any one attempted to assist him in counting his gold.
I’ve a good mind to turn them out of the house this moment?”

“It was your servant Zillah,” I replied, flinging myself on to the floor, and rapidly resuming my garments.
I declined joining their breakfast, and, at the first gleam of dawn, took an opportunity of escaping into the free air, now clear, and still, and cold as impalpable ice.
You must go up and offer to kiss her, and say—you know best what to say; only do it heartily, and not as if you thought her converted into a stranger by her grand dress.
The contrast resembled what you see in exchanging a bleak, hilly, coal country for a beautiful fertile valley; and his voice and greeting were as opposite as his aspect.
And now that she is vanished to her rest, and I have meditated for another hour or two, I shall summon courage to go also, in spite of aching laziness of head and limbs.
Look, I’m not a stranger!”

A ray fell on his features; the cheeks were sallow, and half covered with black whiskers; the brows lowering, the eyes deep-set and singular.
The day after, there was a justice-meeting at the next town; my master was obliged to attend; and Mr. Heathcliff, aware of his absence, called rather earlier than usual.
I saw nothing for it but to hold my tongue, and suffer matters to take their course; and Kenneth being arrived, I went with a badly composed countenance to announce him.
Linton did not reply to this, I believe; and, in a fortnight more, I got a long letter, which I considered odd, coming from the pen of a bride just out of the honeymoon.
and—mind you don’t tell Edgar, or Catherine—above every sorrow beside, this rose pre-eminent: despair at finding nobody who could or would be my ally against Heathcliff!
I went, at the earliest opportunity, and besought him to depart; affirming that Catherine was better, and he should hear from me in the morning how she passed the night.
We, at the Grange, never got a very succinct account of his state preceding it; all that I did learn was on occasion of going to aid in the preparations for the funeral.
Her father invariably spent that day alone in the library; and walked, at dusk, as far as Gimmerton kirkyard, where he would frequently prolong his stay beyond midnight.
Joseph locked the door, and declared I should do ‘no sich stuff,’ and asked me whether I were ‘bahn to be as mad as him.’ I stood crying till the housekeeper reappeared.
We saw him walking to and fro in the garden while we concluded our meal, and Earnshaw said he’d go and ask why he would not dine: he thought we had grieved him some way.
I had imbibed from her something of her nature and much of her habits: more harmonious thoughts: what seemed better regulated feelings had become the inmates of my mind.
It was three o’clock; the church bell tolled as I passed under the belfry: the charm of the hour lay in its approaching dimness, in the low-gliding and pale-beaming sun.
My ear, too, felt the flow of currents; in what dales and depths I could not tell: but there were many hills beyond Hay, and doubtless many becks threading their passes.
He passed, and I went on; a few steps, and I turned: a sliding sound and an exclamation of “What the deuce is to do now?” and a clattering tumble, arrested my attention.
But what do you think?”

“I should be obliged to take time, sir, before I could give you an answer worthy of your acceptance: a present has many faces to it, has it not?
Take her to bed.”

Adèle went to kiss him before quitting the room: he endured the caress, but scarcely seemed to relish it more than Pilot would have done, nor so much.
Don’t trouble yourself to answer—I see you laugh rarely; but you can laugh very merrily: believe me, you are not naturally austere, any more than I am naturally vicious.
Besides, I know what sort of a mind I have placed in communication with my own: I know it is one not liable to take infection: it is a peculiar mind: it is a unique one.
He was proud, sardonic, harsh to inferiority of every description: in my secret soul I knew that his great kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity to many others.
Not a moment could be lost: the very sheets were kindling, I rushed to his basin and ewer; fortunately, one was wide and the other deep, and both were filled with water.
She played: her execution was brilliant; she sang: her voice was fine; she talked French apart to her mamma; and she talked it well, with fluency and with a good accent.
Lord Ingram flirted with Amy Eshton; Louisa played and sang to and with one of the Messrs. Lynn; and Mary Ingram listened languidly to the gallant speeches of the other.
Don’t you think so?”

“With the ladies you must have managed well.”

“But not with you?”

“You did not act the character of a gipsy with me.”

“What character did I act?
“No, thank you, sir.”

“And what for, ‘no, thank you?’ if one may inquire.”

“I never have dined with you, sir: and I see no reason why I should now: till—”

“Till what?
I rose, bathed my head and face in water, drank a long draught; felt that though enfeebled I was not ill, and determined that to none but you would I impart this vision.
Wake Sophie when you go upstairs, under pretence of requesting her to rouse you in good time to-morrow; for you must be dressed and have finished breakfast before eight.
“You know I am a scoundrel, Jane?” ere long he inquired wistfully—wondering, I suppose, at my continued silence and tameness, the result rather of weakness than of will.
Whitcross is no town, nor even a hamlet; it is but a stone pillar set up where four roads meet: whitewashed, I suppose, to be more obvious at a distance and in darkness.
And as to the woman who would not take my handkerchief in exchange for her bread, why, she was right, if the offer appeared to her sinister or the exchange unprofitable.
Presently I stood within that clean, bright kitchen—on the very hearth—trembling, sickening; conscious of an aspect in the last degree ghastly, wild, and weather-beaten.
Won in youth to religion, she has cultivated my original qualities thus:—From the minute germ, natural affection, she has developed the overshadowing tree, philanthropy.
“Rather an inhospitable question to put to a visitor; but since you ask it, I answer simply to have a little talk with you; I got tired of my mute books and empty rooms.
It is a fine thing, reader, to be lifted in a moment from indigence to wealth—a very fine thing; but not a matter one can comprehend, or consequently enjoy, all at once.
Jane, you are docile, diligent, disinterested, faithful, constant, and courageous; very gentle, and very heroic: cease to mistrust yourself—I can trust you unreservedly.
“I scorn the counterfeit sentiment you offer: yes, St. John, and I scorn you when you offer it.”

He looked at me fixedly, compressing his well-cut lips while he did so.
A monotonous occupation, calculated to set me asleep, like counting, or—”

“What can you mean by talking in this way to me!” thundered Heathcliff with savage vehemence.
Do you know anything of his history?”

“It’s a cuckoo’s, sir—I know all about it: except where he was born, and who were his parents, and how he got his money at first.
Or reading sermons, and being catechised by their manservant, and set to learn a column of Scripture names, if they don’t answer properly?” “Probably not,” I responded.
Isabella—I believe she is eleven, a year younger than Cathy—lay screaming at the farther end of the room, shrieking as if witches were running red-hot needles into her.
Well, Heathcliff, have you forgotten me?”

She had some reason to put the question, for shame and pride threw double gloom over his countenance, and kept him immovable.
She was about to insist, when the entrance of Joseph finished our conversation; and Catherine removed her seat to a corner, and nursed Hareton, while I made the supper.
Even you, Nelly, if we have a dispute sometimes, you back Isabella at once; and I yield like a foolish mother: I call her a darling, and flatter her into a good temper.
I’m lately married to Mr. Heathcliff, and he has brought me here—I suppose, by your permission.”

“Is he come back, then?” asked the hermit, glaring like a hungry wolf.
Our labours were scarcely over when I heard Earnshaw’s tread in the passage; my assistant tucked in his tail, and pressed to the wall; I stole into the nearest doorway.
She wouldn’t understand the hint, but followed me to a sideboard, where I went to lay my bonnet, and importuned me in a whisper to give her directly what I had brought.
How many years do you mean to live after I am gone?”

Heathcliff had knelt on one knee to embrace her; he attempted to rise, but she seized his hair, and kept him down.
I’m sure you would have as much pleasure as I in witnessing the conclusion of the fiend’s existence; he’ll be your death unless you overreach him; and he’ll be my ruin.
Linton will conjecture how it is, and trouble himself no further about you.”

“But may I not write a note to tell him why I cannot come?” she asked, rising to her feet.
It was done; I stirred up the ashes, and interred them under a shovelful of coals; and she mutely, and with a sense of intense injury, retired to her private apartment.
I suffered her to enjoy it a while; then I expostulated: deriding and ridiculing all Mr. Heathcliff’s assertions about his son, as if I were certain she would coincide.
He must be wicked to have made Aunt Isabella leave him as she did.”

“She didn’t leave him,” said the boy; “you sha’n’t contradict me.”

“She did,” cried my young lady.
“Be patient,” he replied; “I’ll send up your breakfast in a while.”

I thumped on the panels, and rattled the latch angrily and Catherine asked why I was still shut up?
“You hate me as much as Mr. Heathcliff does, and more.”

“You’re a damned liar,” began Earnshaw: “why have I made him angry, by taking your part, then, a hundred times?
Heathcliff stood at the open door; he was pale, and he trembled: yet, certainly, he had a strange joyful glitter in his eyes, that altered the aspect of his whole face.
“Another minute, and she will despise me for a hypocrite,” thought I; and an impulse of fury against Reed, Brocklehurst, and Co. bounded in my pulses at the conviction.
Does it exist?” And I clasped my arms closer round Helen; she seemed dearer to me than ever; I felt as if I could not let her go; I lay with my face hidden on her neck.
At this period she married, removed with her husband (a clergyman, an excellent man, almost worthy of such a wife) to a distant county, and consequently was lost to me.
“She is a person we have to sew and assist Leah in her housemaid’s work,” continued the widow; “not altogether unobjectionable in some points, but she does well enough.
When you came on me in Hay Lane last night, I thought unaccountably of fairy tales, and had half a mind to demand whether you had bewitched my horse: I am not sure yet.
In the mornings he seemed much engaged with business, and, in the afternoon, gentlemen from Millcote or the neighbourhood called, and sometimes stayed to dine with him.
I was just beginning to stifle with the fumes of conservatory flowers and sprinkled essences, when I bethought myself to open the window and step out on to the balcony.
Retaining every minute form of respect, every propriety of my station, I could still meet him in argument without fear or uneasy restraint; this suited both him and me.
Still, now and then, I received a damping check to my cheerfulness; and was, in spite of myself, thrown back on the region of doubts and portents, and dark conjectures.
Well, to-night I excuse you; but understand that so long as my visitors stay, I expect you to appear in the drawing-room every evening; it is my wish; don’t neglect it.
It had formerly been my endeavour to study all sides of his character: to take the bad with the good; and from the just weighing of both, to form an equitable judgment.
pause—reflect!” was her mama’s cry; but she swept past her in stately silence, passed through the door which Colonel Dent held open, and we heard her enter the library.
Sometimes, for a fleeting moment, I thought I caught a glance, heard a tone, beheld a form, which announced the realisation of my dream: but I was presently undeceived.
I was transported in thought to the scenes of childhood: I dreamt I lay in the red-room at Gateshead; that the night was dark, and my mind impressed with strange fears.
In her simple words, too, the same balm-like emotion spoke: “Try to eat.”

“Yes—try,” repeated Mary gently; and Mary’s hand removed my sodden bonnet and lifted my head.
What do you see amiss in me?”

This was said with a careless, abstracted indifference, which showed that my solicitude was, at least in his opinion, wholly superfluous.
It was vain to try to read with such an inscrutable fixture before me; nor could I, in impatience, consent to be dumb; he might rebuff me if he liked, but talk I would.
Well, he would marry her.”

“You shall tell me this part of the story another time,” I said; “but now I have a particular reason for wishing to hear all about the fire.
It turned out afterwards that he only got as far as the other side the settle, when he flung himself on a bench by the wall, removed from the fire and remained silent.
It would degrade me to marry Heathcliff now; so he shall never know how I love him: and that, not because he’s handsome, Nelly, but because he’s more myself than I am.
With great grumblings, the fellow rose, and preceded me in my ascent: we mounted to the garrets; he opened a door, now and then, to look into the apartments we passed.
No; you’re not fit to be your own guardian, Isabella, now; and I, being your legal protector, must retain you in my custody, however distasteful the obligation may be.
If he had come nearer, he would probably be aware, from the lights flitting to and fro, and the opening and shutting of the outer doors, that all was not right within.
It was named Catherine; but he never called it the name in full, as he had never called the first Catherine short: probably because Heathcliff had a habit of doing so.
Besides, he’s mine, and I want the triumph of seeing my descendant fairly lord of their estates; my child hiring their children to till their fathers’ lands for wages.
We stayed till afternoon: I could not tear Miss Cathy away sooner; but happily my master had not quitted his apartment, and remained ignorant of our prolonged absence.
You can feel in yourself it is impossible that a person should die for love of a stranger.”

“I was not aware there were eavesdroppers,” muttered the detected villain.
To her inexperienced notions, this itself was a sign of convalescence; and then his cheek was often flushed, and his eyes were bright; she felt sure of his recovering.
“And, Catherine, don’t think or say that I’m very unwell: it is the heavy weather and heat that make me dull; and I walked about, before you came, a great deal for me.
What was filling him with dread we had no means of discerning; but there he was, powerless under its grip, and any addition seemed capable of shocking him into idiocy.
I had gone downstairs at three o’clock to fetch a jug of water; and was passing through the hall with it in my hand, when a sharp knock at the front door made me jump.
“At last, one night she came boldly into my chamber, and frightened me out of my wits, by saying, ‘Tell Mr. Heathcliff that his son is dying—I’m sure he is, this time.
I shall set out for London next week; and I must give you warning that I feel no disposition to retain Thrushcross Grange beyond the twelve months I agreed to rent it.
“It’s a blazing shame, that I cannot oppen t’ blessed Book, but yah set up them glories to sattan, and all t’ flaysome wickednesses that iver were born into th’ warld!
Having thus acknowledged what I owe those who have aided and approved me, I turn to another class; a small one, so far as I know, but not, therefore, to be overlooked.
Bessie supplied the hiatus by a homily of an hour’s length, in which she proved beyond a doubt that I was the most wicked and abandoned child ever reared under a roof.
CHAPTER V
Five o’clock had hardly struck on the morning of the 19th of January, when Bessie brought a candle into my closet and found me already up and nearly dressed.
But the last singularity explains the first, as I intimated once before: you, with your gravity, considerateness, and caution were made to be the recipient of secrets.
CHAPTER XVI
I both wished and feared to see Mr. Rochester on the day which followed this sleepless night: I wanted to hear his voice again, yet feared to meet his eye.
The Dowager might be between forty and fifty: her shape was still fine; her hair (by candle-light at least) still black; her teeth, too, were still apparently perfect.
Henry Lynn has taken possession of an ottoman at the feet of Louisa: Adèle shares it with him: he is trying to talk French with her, and Louisa laughs at his blunders.
At its termination, Colonel Dent and his party consulted in whispers for two minutes, then the Colonel called out—

“Bride!” Mr. Rochester bowed, and the curtain fell.
The results of what you have done become in time to you utterly insupportable; you take measures to obtain relief: unusual measures, but neither unlawful nor culpable.
I remember her appearance at the moment—it was very graceful and very striking: she wore a morning robe of sky-blue crape; a gauzy azure scarf was twisted in her hair.
I knew such an idea would shock, perhaps offend you; and you were so discreet, and so thoroughly modest and sensible, I hoped you might be trusted to protect yourself.
The ring, Adèle, is in my breeches-pocket, under the disguise of a sovereign: but I mean soon to change it to a ring again.”

“But what has mademoiselle to do with it?
Not I!—they are fifteen years too late!”

He passed on and ascended the stairs, still holding my hand, and still beckoning the gentlemen to follow him, which they did.
For ten long years I roved about, living first in one capital, then another: sometimes in St. Petersburg; oftener in Paris; occasionally in Rome, Naples, and Florence.
Not a human being that ever lived could wish to be loved better than I was loved; and him who thus loved me I absolutely worshipped: and I must renounce love and idol.
Do not ask me, reader, to give a minute account of that day; as before, I sought work; as before, I was repulsed; as before, I starved; but once did food pass my lips.
Do with me and for me as you like; but excuse me from much discourse—my breath is short—I feel a spasm when I speak.” All three surveyed me, and all three were silent.
Nature had surely formed her in a partial mood; and, forgetting her usual stinted step-mother dole of gifts, had endowed this, her darling, with a grand-dame’s bounty.
Charity carried the friendless thing to the house of its rich maternal relations; it was reared by an aunt-in-law, called (I come to names now) Mrs. Reed of Gateshead.
It is—that he asks me to be his wife, and has no more of a husband’s heart for me than that frowning giant of a rock, down which the stream is foaming in yonder gorge.
And for the rest, though you have a man’s vigorous brain, you have a woman’s heart and—it would not do.”

“It would do,” I affirmed with some disdain, “perfectly well.
What sweet madness has seized me?”

“No delusion—no madness: your mind, sir, is too strong for delusion, your health too sound for frenzy.”

“And where is the speaker?
Yes, I thank God!”

He put me off his knee, rose, and reverently lifting his hat from his brow, and bending his sightless eyes to the earth, he stood in mute devotion.
She thought that some of them had been laying violent hands on me; and, not daring to attack her master, she turned her vocal artillery against the younger scoundrel.
He threw himself into a chair, laughing and groaning, and bid them all stand off, for he was nearly killed—he would not have such another walk for the three kingdoms.
If I don’t floor him now, I shall murder him some time; so, as you value his existence, let me get at him!”

“He is not coming,” I interposed, framing a bit of a lie.
It is strong enough to make me feel pretty certain that he would not chase me over England, supposing I contrived a clear escape; and therefore I must get quite away.
Consequently, he rose, in suicidal low spirits, as fit for the church as for a dance; and instead, he sat down by the fire and swallowed gin or brandy by tumblerfuls.
I used to draw a comparison between him and Hindley Earnshaw, and perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct was so opposite in similar circumstances.
You can bid her go to the Grange at once, if she be able, and carry a message from me, that her young lady will follow in time to attend the squire’s funeral.’”

“Mr.
You’ll neither see nor hear anything to frighten you, if you refrain from prying.”

Having swept the hearth and wiped the table, I departed; more perplexed than ever.
“When day breaks I’ll send for Green,” he said; “I wish to make some legal inquiries of him while I can bestow a thought on those matters, and while I can act calmly.
Another stick of the penknife, when she pretended to pat my head: and that is because I said I did not like the society of children and old women (low be it spoken!).
And I may get it as sweet and fresh as the wild honey the bee gathers on the moor.”

“It will sting—it will taste bitter, sir.”

“How do you know?—you never tried it.
“They began to talk; their conversation eased me completely: frivolous, mercenary, heartless, and senseless, it was rather calculated to weary than enrage a listener.
And you have derived pleasure from occasional tokens of preference—equivocal tokens shown by a gentleman of family and a man of the world to a dependent and a novice.
And overhead—yes, in the room just above my chamber-ceiling—I now heard a struggle: a deadly one it seemed from the noise; and a half-smothered voice shouted—

“Help!
“She worried me like a tigress, when Rochester got the knife from her.”

“You should not have yielded: you should have grappled with her at once,” said Mr. Rochester.
“I think I may confess,” he continued, “even although I should make you a little indignant, Jane—and I have seen what a fire-spirit you can be when you are indignant.
The explanation of the intent of matrimony was gone through; and then the clergyman came a step further forward, and, bending slightly towards Mr. Rochester, went on.
“You know this place, Mason,” said our guide; “she bit and stabbed you here.”

He lifted the hangings from the wall, uncovering the second door: this, too, he opened.
I long to exert a fraction of Samson’s strength, and break the entanglement like tow!”

He recommenced his walk, but soon again stopped, and this time just before me.
Now that you think me disqualified to become your husband, you recoil from my touch as if I were some toad or ape.”

These words cut me: yet what could I do or I say?
Go up to your own room; think over all I have said, and, Jane, cast a glance on my sufferings—think of me.”

He turned away; he threw himself on his face on the sofa.
He had been a bit ailing like the day before, but naught to signify; and when Mr. St. John asked if he would like either o’ ye to be sent for, he fair laughed at him.
His chest heaved once, as if his large heart, weary of despotic constriction, had expanded, despite the will, and made a vigorous bound for the attainment of liberty.
You will not be summoned to leave England sooner than you expected?”

“I fear not, indeed: such chance is too good to befall me.” Baffled so far, I changed my ground.
They could always talk; and their discourse, witty, pithy, original, had such charms for me, that I preferred listening to, and sharing in it, to doing anything else.
Which would you have?”

“Are there no boys at the farm?”

“No; those are all.”

“Then, it follows that I am compelled to stay.”

“That you may settle with your host.
I fancied the discontent of age and disease arose from his family disagreements; as he would have it that it did: really, you know, sir, it was in his sinking frame.
He might well skulk behind the settle, on beholding such a bright, graceful damsel enter the house, instead of a rough-headed counterpart of himself, as he expected.
“I’m in hell till you do!”

He lifted the latch, and I entered; but when I got to the parlour where Mr. and Mrs. Linton were, I could not persuade myself to proceed.
He did not raise his to her often: a quick glance now and then sufficed; but it flashed back, each time more confidently, the undisguised delight he drank from hers.
You are welcome to torture me to death for your amusement, only allow me to amuse myself a little in the same style, and refrain from insult as much as you are able.
“How is this?” said Linton, addressing her; “what notion of propriety must you have to remain here, after the language which has been held to you by that blackguard?
This bed is the fairy cave under Penistone Crags, and you are gathering elf-bolts to hurt our heifers; pretending, while I am near, that they are only locks of wool.
“It does appear odd—I see a face in it!”

“There’s no press in the room, and never was,” said I, resuming my seat, and looping up the curtain that I might watch her.
Notwithstanding my hurry, I stayed to examine it, lest ever after I should have the conviction impressed on my imagination that it was a creature of the other world.
And now he stared at her so earnestly that I thought the very intensity of his gaze would bring tears into his eyes; but they burned with anguish: they did not melt.
Drink your tea, and take breath, and give over laughing: laughter is sadly out of place under this roof, and in your condition!”

“An undeniable truth,” she replied.
Yes, Nell,” he added, when they had departed, “my son is prospective owner of your place, and I should not wish him to die till I was certain of being his successor.
The day being wet, she could not divert herself with rambling about the park; so, at the conclusion of her morning studies, she resorted to the solace of the drawer.
She would gladly have gathered it up at this information, but Hareton beat her; he seized and put it in his waistcoat, saying Mr. Heathcliff should look at it first.
He roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state approaching distraction; his heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick as to leave no space for common breathing between.
Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand; to the left were the clear panes of glass, protecting, but not separating me from the drear November day.
Good-bye.”

“Good-bye, Mr. Brocklehurst; remember me to Mrs. and Miss Brocklehurst, and to Augusta and Theodore, and Master Broughton Brocklehurst.”

“I will, madam.
I remember but little of the journey; I only know that the day seemed to me of a preternatural length, and that we appeared to travel over hundreds of miles of road.
You must be on your guard against her; you must shun her example; if necessary, avoid her company, exclude her from your sports, and shut her out from your converse.
“Barbara,” she said to the servant who answered it, “I have not yet had tea; bring the tray and place cups for these two young ladies.”

And a tray was soon brought.
His changes of mood did not offend me, because I saw that I had nothing to do with their alternation; the ebb and flow depended on causes quite disconnected with me.
Be sure that is the only tie he seriously acknowledges between you and him; so don’t make him the object of your fine feelings, your raptures, agonies, and so forth.
I have sent John down to the gates to see if there is anything on the road: one can see a long way from thence in the direction of Millcote.” She went to the window.
Then light steps ascended the stairs; and there was a tripping through the gallery, and soft cheerful laughs, and opening and closing doors, and, for a time, a hush.
I had regained the gallery, and was just shutting the back-door behind me, when an accelerated hum warned me that the ladies were about to issue from their chambers.
Some of them were very tall; many were dressed in white; and all had a sweeping amplitude of array that seemed to magnify their persons as a mist magnifies the moon.
The want of his animating influence appeared to be peculiarly felt one day that he had been summoned to Millcote on business, and was not likely to return till late.
I wish to foster, not to blight—to earn gratitude, not to wring tears of blood—no, nor of brine: my harvest must be in smiles, in endearments, in sweet—That will do.
“Oh, lean on me, sir.”

“Jane, you offered me your shoulder once before; let me have it now.”

“Yes, sir, yes; and my arm.”

He sat down, and made me sit beside him.
“But if I were to go to them, and they only looked at me coldly, and whispered sneeringly amongst each other, and then dropped off and left me one by one, what then?
I, supposing he had done with me, prepared to return to the house; again, however, I heard him call “Jane!” He had opened the portal and stood at it, waiting for me.
I used to look at my master’s face to see if it were sad or fierce; but I could not remember the time when it had been so uniformly clear of clouds or evil feelings.
Did she think, Janet, you had given the world for love, and considered it well lost?”

“I believe she thought I had forgotten my station, and yours, sir.”

“Station!
As I love—loved am I!”

He rose and came towards me, and I saw his face all kindled, and his full falcon-eye flashing, and tenderness and passion in every lineament.
I turned in the direction of the sound, and there, amongst the romantic hills, whose changes and aspect I had ceased to note an hour ago, I saw a hamlet and a spire.
He got up, held it close to my eyes: and I read, traced in Indian ink, in my own handwriting, the words “JANE EYRE”—the work doubtless of some moment of abstraction.
The bitter check had wrung from me some tears; and now, as I sat poring over the crabbed characters and flourishing tropes of an Indian scribe, my eyes filled again.
Remember, we are bid to work while it is day—warned that ‘the night cometh when no man shall work.’ Remember the fate of Dives, who had his good things in this life.
And it was the voice of a human being—a known, loved, well-remembered voice—that of Edward Fairfax Rochester; and it spoke in pain and woe, wildly, eerily, urgently.
I know they would be clever, for you are a talented creature!”

“He approved of them—yes.”

“He would discover many things in you he could not have expected to find?
You will think me superstitious,—some superstition I have in my blood, and always had: nevertheless, this is true—true at least it is that I heard what I now relate.
I took that dear hand, held it a moment to my lips, then let it pass round my shoulder: being so much lower of stature than he, I served both for his prop and guide.
Above the chimney were sundry villainous old guns, and a couple of horse-pistols: and, by way of ornament, three gaudily-painted canisters disposed along its ledge.
Well, the conclusion was, that my mistress grumbled herself calm; and Mr. Earnshaw told me to wash it, and give it clean things, and let it sleep with the children.
Mrs. Dean raised the candle, and I discerned a soft-featured face, exceedingly resembling the young lady at the Heights, but more pensive and amiable in expression.
He many a time spoke sternly to me about my pertness; and averred that the stab of a knife could not inflict a worse pang than he suffered at seeing his lady vexed.
He followed my guidance without waste of words, and I ushered him into the presence of the master and mistress, whose flushed cheeks betrayed signs of warm talking.
Mr. Heathcliff sat at a table, turning over some papers in his pocket-book; but he rose when I appeared, asked me how I did, quite friendly, and offered me a chair.
Sometimes, indeed, while surveying the country from her nursery window, she would observe—

“Ellen, how long will it be before I can walk to the top of those hills?
Catherine ran wild with joy at the idea of welcoming her father back; and indulged most sanguine anticipations of the innumerable excellencies of her “real” cousin.
I saw she was sorry for his persevering sulkiness and indolence: her conscience reproved her for frightening him off improving himself: she had done it effectually.
This room was chill, because it seldom had a fire; it was silent, because remote from the nursery and kitchen; solemn, because it was known to be so seldom entered.
I stood, a wretched child enough, whispering to myself over and over again, “What shall I do?—what shall I do?”

All at once I heard a clear voice call, “Miss Jane!
The second, Louisa, was taller and more elegant in figure; with a very pretty face, of that order the French term minois chiffoné: both sisters were fair as lilies.
You could not now traverse the gallery, once so hushed, nor enter the front chambers, once so tenantless, without encountering a smart lady’s-maid or a dandy valet.
You’ve a quick ear.”

“I have; and a quick eye and a quick brain.”

“You need them all in your trade.”

“I do; especially when I’ve customers like you to deal with.
The well-known face was there: stern, relentless as ever—there was that peculiar eye which nothing could melt, and the somewhat raised, imperious, despotic eyebrow.
I began to cherish hopes I had no right to conceive: that the match was broken off; that rumour had been mistaken; that one or both parties had changed their minds.
The east had its own charm or fine deep blue, and its own modest gem, a rising and solitary star: soon it would boast the moon; but she was yet beneath the horizon.
He means to marry you?”

“He tells me so.”

She surveyed my whole person: in her eyes I read that they had there found no charm powerful enough to solve the enigma.
The present—the passing second of time—was all I had in which to control and restrain him: a movement of repulsion, flight, fear would have sealed my doom,—and his.
That woman, who has so abused your long-suffering, so sullied your name, so outraged your honour, so blighted your youth, is not your wife, nor are you her husband.
Hannah had been cold and stiff, indeed, at the first: latterly she had begun to relent a little; and when she saw me come in tidy and well-dressed, she even smiled.
He accounted it a pity that so fine and talented a young man should have formed the design of going out as a missionary; it was quite throwing a valuable life away.
They were expected about dark, and ere dusk fires were lit upstairs and below; the kitchen was in perfect trim; Hannah and I were dressed, and all was in readiness.
Let us be friends.”

“I hope we are friends,” was the unmoved reply; while he still watched the rising of the moon, which he had been contemplating as I approached.
I had thought he would hardly speak to me, and I was certain he had given up the pursuit of his matrimonial scheme: the sequel showed I was mistaken on both points.
Let me look at your watch.”

“Fasten it into your girdle, Janet, and keep it henceforward: I have no use for it.”

“It is nearly four o’clock in the afternoon, sir.
The last letter I received from him drew from my eyes human tears, and yet filled my heart with divine joy: he anticipated his sure reward, his incorruptible crown.
“The roads will be buried already; and, if they were bare, I could scarcely distinguish a foot in advance.”

“Hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch.
Next time, Master Edgar, take the law into your own fists—it will give you an appetite!”

The little party recovered its equanimity at sight of the fragrant feast.
I could not have imagined her to be so selfish.” She lifted a mouthful to her lips: then she set it down again: her cheeks flushed, and the tears gushed over them.
“He is reformed in every respect, apparently: quite a Christian: offering the right hand of fellowship to his enemies all around!”

“He explained it,” she replied.
I was laid alone, for the first time; and, rousing from a dismal doze after a night of weeping, I lifted my hand to push the panels aside: it struck the table-top!
she wants none of your tears!”

I was weeping as much for him as her: we do sometimes pity creatures that have none of the feeling either for themselves or others.
You mustn’t think I care little for Catherine, because I behaved so foolishly on entering: I’ve cried, too, bitterly—yes, more than any one else has reason to cry.
They had both been fond husbands, and were both attached to their children; and I could not see how they shouldn’t both have taken the same road, for good or evil.
indeed, I hate them all: they are odious beings.”

Cathy began searching for some water; she lighted on a pitcher in the dresser, filled a tumbler, and brought it.
I was not as ill when you entered as I am at present—was I?”

“But you’ve made yourself ill by crying and being in a passion.—I didn’t do it all,” said his cousin.
Her day was divided between us; no amusement usurped a minute: she neglected her meals, her studies, and her play; and she was the fondest nurse that ever watched.
I did detect a figure creeping along the inner fence of the park; but it was not my young mistress: on its emerging into the light, I recognised one of the grooms.
Linton had certainly behaved provokingly: however, it was the business of nobody but me, and I interrupted Mr. Heathcliff’s lecture by entering and telling him so.
She snatched at the instrument, and half succeeded in getting it out of his loosened fingers: but her action recalled him to the present; he recovered it speedily.
He would have carried his delegated authority to the point of insisting that Edgar Linton should not be buried beside his wife, but in the chapel, with his family.
Joseph was fain, I believe, of the lad’s removal; Hareton seemed a thought bothered: though he was more taken up with staring at Catherine than thinking of Linton.
“Yes that’s all the good that such a brute as you can get from them!” cried Catherine, sucking her damaged lip, and watching the conflagration with indignant eyes.
It was the hour of study; they were engaged in conning over their to-morrow’s task, and the hum I had heard was the combined result of their whispered repetitions.
You are aware that my plan in bringing up these girls is, not to accustom them to habits of luxury and indulgence, but to render them hardy, patient, self-denying.
I dreaded being discovered and sent back; for I must see Helen,—I must embrace her before she died,—I must give her one last kiss, exchange with her one last word.
“Excuse me,” he continued: “necessity compels me to make you useful.” He laid a heavy hand on my shoulder, and leaning on me with some stress, limped to his horse.
On the neck lay a pale reflection like moonlight; the same faint lustre touched the train of thin clouds from which rose and bowed this vision of the Evening Star.
It would please me now to draw you out—to learn more of you—therefore speak.”

Instead of speaking, I smiled; and not a very complacent or submissive smile either.
The dining-room doors were thrown open; and, as it was Christmas-time, the servants were allowed to assemble in the hall, to hear some of the ladies sing and play.
I saw them smile, laugh—it was nothing; the light of the candles had as much soul in it as their smile; the tinkle of the bell as much significance as their laugh.
I passed up the street, looking as I went at all the houses to the right hand and to the left; but I could discover no pretext, nor see an inducement to enter any.
I could no longer talk or laugh freely when he was by, because a tiresomely importunate instinct reminded me that vivacity (at least in me) was distasteful to him.
Earnestness is ever deeply solemn: first, as I listened to that prayer, I wondered at his; then, when it continued and rose, I was touched by it, and at last awed.
I passed my finger over his eyebrows, and remarked that they were scorched, and that I would apply something which would make them grow as broad and black as ever.
And there was a pleasure in my services, most full, most exquisite, even though sad—because he claimed these services without painful shame or damping humiliation.
I don’t know what would have concluded the scene, had there not been one person at hand rather more rational than myself, and more benevolent than my entertainer.
But it was one of their chief amusements to run away to the moors in the morning and remain there all day, and the after punishment grew a mere thing to laugh at.
how could I offend a man who was charitable enough to sit at my bedside a good hour, and talk on some other subject than pills and draughts, blisters and leeches?
I shall stay an hour or two willingly.”

He took a seat opposite Catherine, who kept her gaze fixed on him as if she feared he would vanish were she to remove it.
His new source of trouble sprang from the not anticipated misfortune of Isabella Linton evincing a sudden and irresistible attraction towards the tolerated guest.
I had seen it follow its mistress upstairs when she went to bed; and wondered much how it could have got out there, and what mischievous person had treated it so.
You fight against that devil for love as long as you may; when the time comes, not all the angels in heaven shall save him!”

I surveyed the weapon inquisitively.
I’ll extract wholesome medicines from Mrs. Dean’s bitter herbs; and firstly, let me beware of the fascination that lurks in Catherine Heathcliff’s brilliant eyes.
The Crags lie about a mile and a half beyond Mr. Heathcliff’s place, and that is four from the Grange, so I began to fear night would fall ere I could reach them.
Step in and rest you a bit.”

I entered, and beheld my stray lamb seated on the hearth, rocking herself in a little chair that had been her mother’s when a child.
You wicked creature, I shall tell papa what you said.—Now, then!”

Hareton did not appear to feel this threat; so the tears sprang into her eyes with indignation.
He pushed his horse close, and, bending down, observed—“Miss Catherine, I’ll own to you that I have little patience with Linton; and Hareton and Joseph have less.
The scene was over in two minutes; Catherine, released, put her two hands to her temples, and looked just as if she were not sure whether her ears were off or on.
You’ll be able to tell his uncle fine tales of his kindness, when you get home again, I assure you.”

“You’re right there!” I said; “explain your son’s character.
I’m so wretched, you can’t help being sorry and pitying me.”

“Keep your eft’s fingers off; and move, or I’ll kick you!” cried Heathcliff, brutally repulsing her.
Having rested awhile, I directed my servant to inquire the way to the village; and, with great fatigue to our beasts, we managed the distance in some three hours.
“No, I’m not hungry,” he answered, averting his head, and speaking rather contemptuously, as if he guessed I was trying to divine the occasion of his good humour.
Bessie and Abbot having retreated, Mrs. Reed, impatient of my now frantic anguish and wild sobs, abruptly thrust me back and locked me in, without farther parley.
Am I ill?”

“You fell sick, I suppose, in the red-room with crying; you’ll be better soon, no doubt.”

Bessie went into the housemaid’s apartment, which was near.
His dark eyes and swarthy skin and Paynim features suited the costume exactly: he looked the very model of an Eastern emir, an agent or a victim of the bowstring.
His guest had been outraged, his own life on a former occasion had been hideously plotted against; and both attempts he smothered in secrecy and sank in oblivion!
Mind, I don’t say a crime; I am not speaking of shedding of blood or any other guilty act, which might make the perpetrator amenable to the law: my word is error.
She turned as I drew near, and looked at me haughtily: her eyes seemed to demand, “What can the creeping creature want now?” and when I said, in a low voice, “Mr.
I was not born for a different destiny to the rest of my species: to imagine such a lot befalling me is a fairy tale—a day-dream.”

“Which I can and will realise.
Will it annoy you if she is left behind?”

“I would far rather she went, sir.”

“Then off for your bonnet, and back like a flash of lightning!” cried he to Adèle.
I told him in a new series of whispers, that he might as well buy me a gold gown and a silver bonnet at once: I should certainly never venture to wear his choice.
I feared my hopes were too bright to be realised; and I had enjoyed so much bliss lately that I imagined my fortune had passed its meridian, and must now decline.
I felt it was what was to be expected, and what could not be helped: an ordinary beggar is frequently an object of suspicion; a well-dressed beggar inevitably so.
“Hannah,” said Mr. St. John, at last, “let her sit there at present, and ask her no questions; in ten minutes more, give her the remainder of that milk and bread.
It was my nature to feel pleasure in yielding to an authority supported like hers, and to bend, where my conscience and self-respect permitted, to an active will.
Their amazement at me, my language, my rules, and ways, once subsided, I found some of these heavy-looking, gaping rustics wake up into sharp-witted girls enough.
Then I rose up on my curtainless bed, trembling and quivering; and then the still, dark night witnessed the convulsion of despair, and heard the burst of passion.
She will forget me; and will marry, probably, some one who will make her far happier than I should do.”

“You speak coolly enough; but you suffer in the conflict.
My uncle I had heard was dead—my only relative; ever since being made aware of his existence, I had cherished the hope of one day seeing him: now, I never should.
“What does this signify?”

“Do not let us forget that this is a solemn matter,” he said ere long; “one of which we may neither think nor talk lightly without sin.
I am hungry: so are you, I daresay, only you forget.”

Summoning Mary, I soon had the room in more cheerful order: I prepared him, likewise, a comfortable repast.
I asked of God, at once in anguish and humility, if I had not been long enough desolate, afflicted, tormented; and might not soon taste bliss and peace once more.
“Do you intend parting with the little ones, madam?”

“They are not mine,” said the amiable hostess, more repellingly than Heathcliff himself could have replied.
Come in, and I’ll cure that: there now, hold ye still.”

With these words she suddenly splashed a pint of icy water down my neck, and pulled me into the kitchen.
He then stepped across the pavement to her, and said something: she seemed embarrassed, and desirous of getting away; to prevent it, he laid his hand on her arm.
Heathcliff stayed to speak to him, and I entered the kitchen—a dingy, untidy hole; I daresay you would not know it, it is so changed since it was in your charge.
It is a foolish story to assert that Catherine could not bear to see me; and as to surprising her, I don’t desire it: you must prepare her—ask her if I may come.
Her thick, long hair had been partly removed at the beginning of her illness, and now she wore it simply combed in its natural tresses over her temples and neck.
I only wish us never to be parted: and should a word of mine distress you hereafter, think I feel the same distress underground, and for my own sake, forgive me!
No plan offered itself: the very exhibition of any desire to keep him would have rendered the claimant more peremptory: there was nothing left but to resign him.
Linton, don’t you recall your cousin, that you used to tease us so with wishing to see?”

“What, Linton!” cried Cathy, kindling into joyful surprise at the name.
“One or two, Ellen, to keep for Linton’s sake!”

I unknotted the handkerchief, and commenced dropping them in from an angle, and the flame curled up the chimney.
“I will have one, you cruel wretch!” she screamed, darting her hand into the fire, and drawing forth some half-consumed fragments, at the expense of her fingers.
“I do not ask,” he said, “that she may visit here; but am I never to see her, because my father forbids me to go to her home, and you forbid her to come to mine?
Save yourself: I’m not afraid!”

Her magnanimity provoked his tears: he wept wildly, kissing her supporting hands, and yet could not summon courage to speak out.
Her cousin had shrunk into a corner of the settle, as quiet as a mouse, congratulating himself, I dare say, that the correction had alighted on another than him.
“Linton is all I have to love in the world, and though you have done what you could to make him hateful to me, and me to him, you cannot make us hate each other.
It was night: a candle burnt on the table; Bessie stood at the bed-foot with a basin in her hand, and a gentleman sat in a chair near my pillow, leaning over me.
“Are you not very thankful to have such a fine place to live at?”

“It is not my house, sir; and Abbot says I have less right to be here than a servant.”

“Pooh!
I was puzzling to make out the subject of a picture on the wall, when the door opened, and an individual carrying a light entered; another followed close behind.
When I again unclosed my eyes, a loud bell was ringing; the girls were up and dressing; day had not yet begun to dawn, and a rushlight or two burned in the room.
To your seats!”

Discipline prevailed: in five minutes the confused throng was resolved into order, and comparative silence quelled the Babel clamour of tongues.
Had he been a handsome, heroic-looking young gentleman, I should not have dared to stand thus questioning him against his will, and offering my services unasked.
Your pleasures, by your own account, have been few; but I daresay you did exist in a kind of artist’s dreamland while you blent and arranged these strange tints.
Rochester, allow me to disown my first answer: I intended no pointed repartee: it was only a blunder.”

“Just so: I think so: and you shall be answerable for it.
Floating on with closed eyes and muffled ears, you neither see the rocks bristling not far off in the bed of the flood, nor hear the breakers boil at their base.
I will suffer no competitor near the throne; I shall exact an undivided homage: his devotions shall not be shared between me and the shape he sees in his mirror.
“Take care of him,” said Mr. Rochester to the latter, “and keep him at your house till he is quite well: I shall ride over in a day or two to see how he gets on.
Mr. Reed is dead, and his wife cast me off.”

“Why?”

“Because I was poor, and burdensome, and she disliked me.”

“But Reed left children?—you must have cousins?
The feeling, the announcement sent through me, was something stronger than was consistent with joy—something that smote and stunned: it was, I think almost fear.
Did you ever love such an one?”

“I love it now.”

“But before me: if I, indeed, in any respect come up to your difficult standard?”

“I never met your likeness.
There is no folly so besotted that the idiotic rivalries of society, the prurience, the rashness, the blindness of youth, will not hurry a man to its commission.
“After a youth and manhood passed half in unutterable misery and half in dreary solitude, I have for the first time found what I can truly love—I have found you.
I remembered that strangers who arrive at a place where they have no friends, and who want employment, sometimes apply to the clergyman for introduction and aid.
Besides, since yesterday I have experienced the excitement of a person to whom a tale has been half-told, and who is impatient to hear the sequel.”

He sat down.
Is he well?”

“I am ignorant of all concerning Mr. Rochester: the letter never mentions him but to narrate the fraudulent and illegal attempt I have adverted to.
To what end?”

“To the end of turning to profit the talents which God has committed to your keeping; and of which He will surely one day demand a strict account.
“The match must have been got up hastily,” said Diana: “they cannot have known each other long.”

“But two months: they met in October at the county ball at S——.
Can I receive from him the bridal ring, endure all the forms of love (which I doubt not he would scrupulously observe) and know that the spirit was quite absent?
With me, then, it seems, you cannot go: but if you are sincere in your offer, I will, while in town, speak to a married missionary, whose wife needs a coadjutor.
And then he will stay in England.”

“Far from that, Diana; his sole idea in proposing to me is to procure a fitting fellow-labourer in his Indian toils.”

“What!
They both promised fair to grow up as rude as savages; the young master being entirely negligent how they behaved, and what they did, so they kept clear of him.
Till within a week of her death that gay heart never failed her; and her husband persisted doggedly, nay, furiously, in affirming her health improved every day.
But, perhaps, you’ll never have an opportunity: perhaps, he’s gone.” Here she burst into uncontrollable grief, and the remainder of her words were inarticulate.
or make a fortune more promptly on the English highways?”

“He may have done a little in all these vocations, Mr. Lockwood; but I couldn’t give my word for any.
She was at that time a charming young lady of eighteen; infantile in manners, though possessed of keen wit, keen feelings, and a keen temper, too, if irritated.
But you’ll not want to hear my moralising, Mr. Lockwood; you’ll judge, as well as I can, all these things: at least, you’ll think you will, and that’s the same.
Won’t you be glad to see us?”

“Of course,” replied the uncle, with a hardly suppressed grimace, resulting from his deep aversion to both the proposed visitors.
One day, as she inspected this drawer, I observed that the playthings and trinkets which recently formed its contents were transmuted into bits of folded paper.
We both reached home before our dinner-time; my master supposed we had been wandering through the park, and therefore he demanded no explanation of our absence.
He made no ceremony of knocking or announcing his name: he was master, and availed himself of the master’s privilege to walk straight in, without saying a word.
This hoile’s neither mensful nor seemly for us: we mun side out and seearch another.”

“Come, Catherine,” I said, “we must ‘side out’ too: I’ve done my ironing.
Those two who have left the room are the only objects which retain a distinct material appearance to me; and that appearance causes me pain, amounting to agony.
“Turn round, and tell me, are we by ourselves?”

“Of course,” was my answer; “of course we are.”

Still, I involuntarily obeyed him, as if I was not quite sure.
looked purple, weather-beaten, and over-worked—when, as my eye wandered from face to face, the whole school rose simultaneously, as if moved by a common spring.
You have heard that laugh before, I should think, or something like it?”

“Yes, sir: there is a woman who sews here, called Grace Poole,—she laughs in that way.
“I have not had the opportunity of speaking to him this morning.”

“You did not think of opening your door and looking out into the gallery?” she further asked.
CHAPTER XIX
The library looked tranquil enough as I entered it, and the Sibyl—if Sibyl she were—was seated snugly enough in an easy-chair at the chimney-corner.
“I see no enemy to a fortunate issue but in the brow; and that brow professes to say,—‘I can live alone, if self-respect, and circumstances require me so to do.
what is it?”—“Who is hurt?”—“What has happened?”—“Fetch a light!”—“Is it fire?”—“Are there robbers?”—“Where shall we run?” was demanded confusedly on all hands.
What creature was it, that, masked in an ordinary woman’s face and shape, uttered the voice, now of a mocking demon, and anon of a carrion-seeking bird of prey?
This was very pleasant; there is no happiness like that of being loved by your fellow-creatures, and feeling that your presence is an addition to their comfort.
“Let her come to me,” I entreated: “she will, perhaps, trouble you, sir: there is plenty of room on this side.”

He handed her over as if she had been a lapdog.
I lingered; the moon shut herself wholly within her chamber, and drew close her curtain of dense cloud: the night grew dark; rain came driving fast on the gale.
Half heaven was pure and stainless: the clouds, now trooping before the wind, which had shifted to the west, were filing off eastward in long, silvered columns.
Mr. Mason, he found, had a son and daughter; and he learned from him that he could and would give the latter a fortune of thirty thousand pounds: that sufficed.
Recalled by the rumbling of wheels to the road before me, I saw a heavily-laden waggon labouring up the hill, and not far beyond were two cows and their drover.
The grace and harmony of beauty are quite wanting in those features.”

On the third day I was better; on the fourth, I could speak, move, rise in bed, and turn.
He is alone this evening, and not very well: will you return with me and visit him?”

“It is not a seasonable hour to intrude on Mr. Oliver,” answered St. John.
Turning from me, he once more

“Looked to river, looked to hill.”

But this time his feelings were all pent in his heart: I was not worthy to hear them uttered.
Not that St. John harboured a spirit of unchristian vindictiveness—not that he would have injured a hair of my head, if it had been fully in his power to do so.
If Saul could have had you for his David, the evil spirit would have been exorcised without the aid of the harp.”

“There, sir, you are redd up and made decent.
I descended cautiously to the lower regions, and landed in the back-kitchen, where a gleam of fire, raked compactly together, enabled me to rekindle my candle.
However, Nelly, I shall oblige you to listen: it’s not long; and I’ve no power to be merry to-night.”

“I won’t hear it, I won’t hear it!” I repeated, hastily.
Then we came to the agreement that we would let him ask, if he wanted any; for we feared particularly to go into his presence when he had been some time alone.
She was driven away, never to revisit this neighbourhood: but a regular correspondence was established between her and my master when things were more settled.
I did not fear her breaking bounds; because the gates were generally locked, and I thought she would scarcely venture forth alone, if they had stood wide open.
Though Mr. Hareton, there, be not the master’s son, he’s your cousin: and I was never hired to serve you.”

“He my cousin!” cried Cathy, with a scornful laugh.
Cathy would fain have taken one glance, but her father told her to come, and they walked together up the park, while I hastened before to prepare the servants.
CHAPTER XXII
Summer drew to an end, and early autumn: it was past Michaelmas, but the harvest was late that year, and a few of our fields were still uncleared.
It was a misty afternoon, but the February sun shone dimly, and we could just distinguish the two fir-trees in the yard, and the sparely-scattered gravestones.
Her cousin, after watching her endeavours a while, at last summoned courage to help her; she held her frock, and he filled it with the first that came to hand.
You say you don’t expect them back for some time—the young people?”

“No—I have to scold them every evening for their late rambles: but they don’t care for me.
“What more have you to say?” she asked, rather in the tone in which a person might address an opponent of adult age than such as is ordinarily used to a child.
“You are a strange child, Miss Jane,” she said, as she looked down at me; “a little roving, solitary thing: and you are going to school, I suppose?”

I nodded.
I listened too; and as I happened to be seated quite at the top of the room, I caught most of what he said: its import relieved me from immediate apprehension.
She was pensive a few minutes, then rousing herself, she said cheerfully—

“But you two are my visitors to-night; I must treat you as such.” She rang her bell.
Her appearance always acted as a damper to the curiosity raised by her oral oddities: hard-featured and staid, she had no point to which interest could attach.
Left alone, I walked to the window; but nothing was to be seen thence: twilight and snowflakes together thickened the air, and hid the very shrubs on the lawn.
The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a polar winter sky: a muster of northern lights reared their dim lances, close serried, along the horizon.
“I wish you all good-night, now,” said he, making a movement of the hand towards the door, in token that he was tired of our company, and wished to dismiss us.
Most things free-born will submit to anything for a salary; therefore, keep to yourself, and don’t venture on generalities of which you are intensely ignorant.
The ten minutes John had given seemed very long, but at last wheels were heard; four equestrians galloped up the drive, and after them came two open carriages.
However, it is not my business, and so it suits you, I don’t much care.”

“You are in the right,” said she; and with these words we each went our separate way.
I would not exchange this one little English girl for the Grand Turk’s whole seraglio, gazelle-eyes, houri forms, and all!”

The Eastern allusion bit me again.
Mr. St. John had said nothing to me yet about the employment he had promised to obtain for me; yet it became urgent that I should have a vocation of some kind.
“Have you heard from Diana and Mary lately?”

“Not since the letter I showed you a week ago.”

“There has not been any change made about your own arrangements?
Had I attended to the suggestions of pride and ire, I should immediately have left him; but something worked within me more strongly than those feelings could.
He was not a man given to wine, or cards, or racing, as some are, and he was not so very handsome; but he had a courage and a will of his own, if ever man had.
Well, for sure!”

A short time after she pursued—“I seed you go out with the master, but I didn’t know you were gone to church to be wed;” and she basted away.
We made frightful noises to terrify them still more, and then we dropped off the ledge, because somebody was drawing the bars, and we felt we had better flee.
Catherine supped with her brother and sister-in-law: Joseph and I joined at an unsociable meal, seasoned with reproofs on one side and sauciness on the other.
“You are a dog in the manger, Cathy, and desire no one to be loved but yourself!”

“You are an impertinent little monkey!” exclaimed Mrs. Linton, in surprise.
Desiring to have his reasons for liking him, I could only gather the sentences—“I known’t: he pays dad back what he gies to me—he curses daddy for cursing me.
I obeyed the hint; but Mrs. Linton, suspecting something, followed; and when I attempted to call them, she pulled me back, slammed the door to, and locked it.
How did it begin?”

“The master will inform you,” I answered; “but you are acquainted with the Earnshaws’ violent dispositions, and Mrs. Linton caps them all.
what is ther to do, now?’

“‘There’s this to do,’ thundered Heathcliff, ‘that your master’s mad; and should he last another month, I’ll have him to an asylum.
I don’t pretend to be intimately acquainted with the mode of living customary in those days at Wuthering Heights: I only speak from hearsay; for I saw little.
All you need do, is to wait well on your father, and cheer him by letting him see you cheerful; and avoid giving him anxiety on any subject: mind that, Cathy!
“No,” I answered, “nor next day neither.” She, however, gave a different response evidently, for his forehead cleared as she stooped and whispered in his ear.
As far as I can see, it will be your chief diversion hereafter; unless Linton make amends for other losses: and your provident parent appears to fancy he may.
Having received his orders, I despatched a man to fetch the attorney, and four more, provided with serviceable weapons, to demand my young lady of her jailor.
Are you afraid now in daylight?”

“No: but night will come again before long: and besides,—I am unhappy,—very unhappy, for other things.”

“What other things?
Fairfax, Thornfield, near Millcote, ——shire.”

I examined the document long: the writing was old-fashioned and rather uncertain, like that of an elderly lady.
Rochester, I thought you were not fond of children?”

“Nor am I.”

“Then, what induced you to take charge of such a little doll as that?” (pointing to Adèle).
I did not like this iteration of one idea—this strange recurrence of one image, and I grew nervous as bedtime approached and the hour of the vision drew near.
“Love me, then, or hate me, as you will,” I said at last, “you have my full and free forgiveness: ask now for God’s, and be at peace.”

Poor, suffering woman!
The wind fell, for a second, round Thornfield; but far away over wood and water, poured a wild, melancholy wail: it was sad to listen to, and I ran off again.
I wandered, on a moonlight night, through the grass-grown enclosure within: here I stumbled over a marble hearth, and there over a fallen fragment of cornice.
It led me aslant over the hill, through a wide bog, which would have been impassable in winter, and was splashy and shaking even now, in the height of summer.
These soon took a pleasure in doing their work well, in keeping their persons neat, in learning their tasks regularly, in acquiring quiet and orderly manners.
I remember now seeing the letter E. comprised in your initials written in books you have at different times lent me; but I never asked for what name it stood.
It is in scenes of strife and danger—where courage is proved, and energy exercised, and fortitude tasked—that he will speak and move, the leader and superior.
“Jane is not such a weakling as you would make her,” he would say: “she can bear a mountain blast, or a shower, or a few flakes of snow, as well as any of us.
Without one overt act of hostility, one upbraiding word, he contrived to impress me momently with the conviction that I was put beyond the pale of his favour.
Diana and Mary having kissed him, left the room—in compliance, I think, with a whispered hint from him: I tendered my hand, and wished him a pleasant journey.
It opened slowly: a figure came out into the twilight and stood on the step; a man without a hat: he stretched forth his hand as if to feel whether it rained.
Good night.”

“Just one word, Jane: were there only ladies in the house where you have been?”

I laughed and made my escape, still laughing as I ran upstairs.
In an arch under the dresser reposed a huge, liver-coloured bitch pointer, surrounded by a swarm of squealing puppies; and other dogs haunted other recesses.
A stranger is a stranger, be he rich or poor: it will not suit me to permit any one the range of the place while I am off guard!” said the unmannerly wretch.
I sympathised a while; but when the children fell ill of the measles, and I had to tend them, and take on me the cares of a woman at once, I changed my idea.
Catherine took a hand of each of the children, and brought them into the house and set them before the fire, which quickly put colour into their white faces.
I own I did not like her, after infancy was past; and I vexed her frequently by trying to bring down her arrogance: she never took an aversion to me, though.
I attempted to steal to the door with an intention of calling her husband; but I was summoned back by a piercing shriek—the shawl had dropped from the frame.
I walked round the yard, and through a wicket, to another door, at which I took the liberty of knocking, in hopes some more civil servant might show himself.
He told me of Catherine’s illness, and accused my brother of causing it promising that I should be Edgar’s proxy in suffering, till he could get hold of him.
The same conviction had stricken him as me, from the instant he beheld her, that there was no prospect of ultimate recovery there—she was fated, sure to die.
I rose with an irrepressible expression of what I felt on my lips, which induced my companion, who had been staring towards the door, to turn and look at me.
The ruffian kicked and trampled on him, and dashed his head repeatedly against the flags, holding me with one hand, meantime, to prevent me summoning Joseph.
On the day succeeding Isabella’s unexpected visit I had no opportunity of speaking to my master: he shunned conversation, and was fit for discussing nothing.
“Is he as young and handsome as uncle?”

“He’s as young,” said I; “but he has black hair and eyes, and looks sterner; and he is taller and bigger altogether.
She said he had only been twice, on horseback, accompanying his father; and both times he pretended to be quite knocked up for three or four days afterwards.
“I thought you did not know me, or you wouldn’t have spoken in that way.”

“You suppose papa is highly esteemed and respected, then?” he said, sarcastically.
With Mr. Heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one hand, and Hareton, absolutely dumb, on the other, I made a somewhat cheerless meal, and bade adieu early.
The task was done, not free from further blunders; but the pupil claimed a reward, and received at least five kisses; which, however, he generously returned.
Out of these deep surrounding shades rose high, and glared white, the piled-up mattresses and pillows of the bed, spread with a snowy Marseilles counterpane.
Sometimes, preoccupied with her work, she sang the refrain very low, very lingeringly; “A long time ago” came out like the saddest cadence of a funeral hymn.
I would fain exercise some better faculty than that of fierce speaking; fain find nourishment for some less fiendish feeling than that of sombre indignation.
Above twenty of those clad in this costume were full-grown girls, or rather young women; it suited them ill, and gave an air of oddity even to the prettiest.
It seemed as if, could I but go back to the idea which had last entered my mind as I stood at the window, some inventive suggestion would rise for my relief.
The more you and I converse, the better; for while I cannot blight you, you may refresh me.” After this digression he proceeded—

“I remained in the balcony.
I am up now; but at your peril you fetch a candle yet: wait two minutes till I get into some dry garments, if any dry there be—yes, here is my dressing-gown.
An hour or two sufficed to sketch my own portrait in crayons; and in less than a fortnight I had completed an ivory miniature of an imaginary Blanche Ingram.
“‘To tell the gentry their fortunes,’ she says, ma’am; and she swears she must and will do it.”

“What is she like?” inquired the Misses Eshton, in a breath.
Miss Ingram rose solemnly: “I go first,” she said, in a tone which might have befitted the leader of a forlorn hope, mounting a breach in the van of his men.
Thank God it is no worse!” And now he unknit his black brows; looked down, smiling at me, and stroked my hair, as if well pleased at seeing a danger averted.
I was prepared for the hot rain of tears; only I wanted them to be shed on my breast: now a senseless floor has received them, or your drenched handkerchief.
I say, why do you assign Adèle to me for a companion?”

“You spoke of a retirement, sir; and retirement and solitude are dull: too dull for you.”

“Solitude!
I would have got past Mr. Rochester’s chamber without a pause; but my heart momentarily stopping its beat at that threshold, my foot was forced to stop also.
His mouth certainly looked a good deal compressed, and the lower part of his face unusually stern and square, as the laughing girl gave him this information.
Unmarried to him, this would never grieve me; but can I let him complete his calculations—coolly put into practice his plans—go through the wedding ceremony?
In the prayer following the chapter, all his energy gathered—all his stern zeal woke: he was in deep earnest, wrestling with God, and resolved on a conquest.
“Some days since: nay, I can number them—four; it was last Monday night, a singular mood came over me: one in which grief replaced frenzy—sorrow, sullenness.
Very like the robbers were for putting them through the window to open the doors to the gang after all were asleep, that they might murder us at their ease.
What took you into the rain?”

“Running after t’ lads, as usuald!” croaked Joseph, catching an opportunity from our hesitation to thrust in his evil tongue.
Heathcliff, who had raised his eyes at the former speech, gave a sneering laugh at the latter; on purpose, it seemed, to draw Mr. Linton’s attention to him.
And I pray one prayer—I repeat it till my tongue stiffens—Catherine Earnshaw, may you not rest as long as I am living; you said I killed you—haunt me, then!
“Linton is just six months younger than I am,” she chattered, as we strolled leisurely over the swells and hollows of mossy turf, under shadow of the trees.
No, come here, Miss Catherine, now and then: not every morning, but once or twice a week.”

The father launched towards his son a glance of bitter contempt.
But it was so miserable going to bed and getting up, and never hearing anything about him, that my resolution melted into air before it was properly formed.
I cannot conceive how you manage to doze out of doors, in the morning.”

“I thought I heard my father,” he gasped, glancing up to the frowning nab above us.
You know, they both appeared in a measure my children: I had long been proud of one; and now, I was sure, the other would be a source of equal satisfaction.
“It is a poor conclusion, is it not?” he observed, having brooded awhile on the scene he had just witnessed: “an absurd termination to my violent exertions?
For me, the watches of that long night passed in ghastly wakefulness; ear, eye, and mind were alike strained by dread: such dread as children only can feel.
Christmas and the New Year had been celebrated at Gateshead with the usual festive cheer; presents had been interchanged, dinners and evening parties given.
From the day she left I was no longer the same: with her was gone every settled feeling, every association that had made Lowood in some degree a home to me.
Mounting to it by two broad steps, and looking through, I thought I caught a glimpse of a fairy place, so bright to my novice-eyes appeared the view beyond.
recollect—”

“I do—I recollect all you can suggest; and I must have my will—quick, Sam!”

“Yes—yes—yes!” cried all the juveniles, both ladies and gentlemen.
“No, sir; all was very still.”

“We shall get you off cannily, Dick: and it will be better, both for your sake, and for that of the poor creature in yonder.
“Very much.” I was not fond of pampering that susceptible vanity of his; but for once, and from motives of expediency, I would e’en soothe and stimulate it.
I sought the orchard, driven to its shelter by the wind, which all day had blown strong and full from the south, without, however, bringing a speck of rain.
The second stranger, who had hitherto lingered in the background, now drew near; a pale face looked over the solicitor’s shoulder—yes, it was Mason himself.
For a few minutes, while you smooth your hair—which is somewhat dishevelled; and bathe your face—which looks feverish?”

“I must leave Adèle and Thornfield.
Now and then, in passing a casement, you glanced out at the thick-falling snow; you listened to the sobbing wind, and again you paced gently on and dreamed.
From the well-known names of these towns I learn in what county I have lighted; a north-midland shire, dusk with moorland, ridged with mountain: this I see.
Some of them are unmannered, rough, intractable, as well as ignorant; but others are docile, have a wish to learn, and evince a disposition that pleases me.
She is teachable and handy.” (This then, I thought, is Miss Oliver, the heiress; favoured, it seems, in the gifts of fortune, as well as in those of nature!
“Very well,” I responded, mentally, “stand if you like; but you shall not go just yet, I am determined: solitude is at least as bad for you as it is for me.
This was a blessing, bright, vivid, and exhilarating;—not like the ponderous gift of gold: rich and welcome enough in its way, but sobering from its weight.
I should suffer often, no doubt, attached to him only in this capacity: my body would be under rather a stringent yoke, but my heart and mind would be free.
The breeze is still: it is quite hot.”

“Do you know, Jane, I have your little pearl necklace at this moment fastened round my bronze scrag under my cravat?
Happily, the architect had foresight to build it strong: the narrow windows are deeply set in the wall, and the corners defended with large jutting stones.
“Sir,” I exclaimed, “sitting here within these four walls, at one stretch, I have endured and forgiven the four hundred and ninety heads of your discourse.
A happy family you have; and a pretty state you’re come to!”

“I shall come to a prettier, yet, Nelly,” laughed the misguided man, recovering his hardness.
His countenance was much older in expression and decision of feature than Mr. Linton’s; it looked intelligent, and retained no marks of former degradation.
CHAPTER XI
Sometimes, while meditating on these things in solitude, I’ve got up in a sudden terror, and put on my bonnet to go see how all was at the farm.
“I am come to see thy father, Hareton,” I added, guessing from the action that Nelly, if she lived in his memory at all, was not recognised as one with me.
It is to amuse myself that I dwell on such subjects as the lack of external comforts: they never occupy my thoughts, except at the moment when I miss them.
“Somebody’s love comes short in her case, obviously; whose, I may guess; but, perhaps, I shouldn’t say.”

“I should guess it was her own,” said Heathcliff.
You thirteen years old, and such a baby!”

This exclamation was caused by her pushing the hat from her head, and retreating to the chimney out of my reach.
I’ve ordered Hareton to obey him: and in fact I’ve arranged everything with a view to preserve the superior and the gentleman in him, above his associates.
there was Miss standing at the table with a bit of blank paper before her and a pencil in her hand, which she guiltily slipped out of sight on my entrance.
“You mustn’t cry because papa has a cold; be thankful it is nothing worse.”

She now put no further restraint on her tears; her breath was stifled by sobs.
You could have hit on no surer way of fixing your residence under my roof for the next twenty-four hours than informing me that such an event would follow.
“I believe the dead are at peace: but it is not right to speak of them with levity.”

At that moment the garden gate swung to; the ramblers were returning.
No severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this incident of the red-room; it only gave my nerves a shock of which I feel the reverberation to this day.
I could not sleep unless it was folded in my night-gown; and when it lay there safe and warm, I was comparatively happy, believing it to be happy likewise.
Overpowered by this time with weariness, I scarcely noticed what sort of a place the bedroom was, except that, like the schoolroom, I saw it was very long.
I looked: I saw a woman attired like a well-dressed servant, matronly, yet still young; very good-looking, with black hair and eyes, and lively complexion.
The large front chambers I thought especially grand: and some of the third-storey rooms, though dark and low, were interesting from their air of antiquity.
I made some attempts to draw her into conversation, but she seemed a person of few words: a monosyllabic reply usually cut short every effort of that sort.
Leaving superiority out of the question, then, you must still agree to receive my orders now and then, without being piqued or hurt by the tone of command.
Reformation may be its cure; and I could reform—I have strength yet for that—if—but where is the use of thinking of it, hampered, burdened, cursed as I am?
But the three most distinguished—partly, perhaps, because the tallest figures of the band—were the Dowager Lady Ingram and her daughters, Blanche and Mary.
On its third rising only a portion of the drawing-room was disclosed; the rest being concealed by a screen, hung with some sort of dark and coarse drapery.
But in other points, as well as this, I was growing very lenient to my master: I was forgetting all his faults, for which I had once kept a sharp look-out.
During all that time she never turned a page
Meantime, Mary Ingram, Amy and Louisa Eshton, declared they dared not go alone; and yet they all wished to go.
When will he come?” I cried inwardly, as the night lingered and lingered—as my bleeding patient drooped, moaned, sickened: and neither day nor aid arrived.
Neither of these returnings was very pleasant or desirable: no magnet drew me to a given point, increasing in its strength of attraction the nearer I came.
During the first twelve hours I thought of Mrs. Reed in her last moments; I saw her disfigured and discoloured face, and heard her strangely altered voice.
These affirmed that it was pleasure enough to have the privilege of again looking on Mr. Rochester, whether he looked on me or not; and they added—“Hasten!
Some time passed before I felt tranquil even here: I had a vague dread that wild cattle might be near, or that some sportsman or poacher might discover me.
Mary’s countenance was equally intelligent—her features equally pretty; but her expression was more reserved, and her manners, though gentle, more distant.
“Now do, brother, let her be at peace a while.”

But when St. John had mused a few moments he recommenced as imperturbably and with as much acumen as ever.
But besides his frequent absences, there was another barrier to friendship with him: he seemed of a reserved, an abstracted, and even of a brooding nature.
They will keep.”

“You know what you undertake, then?”

“I do.”

He now smiled: and not a bitter or a sad smile, but one well pleased and deeply gratified.
“You must prove your identity of course,” resumed St. John presently: “a step which will offer no difficulties; you can then enter on immediate possession.
“Does not the consciousness of having done some real good in your day and generation give pleasure?”

“Doubtless.”

“And you have only toiled a few months!
I had meant to be gay and careless, but the powerlessness of the strong man touched my heart to the quick: still I accosted him with what vivacity I could.
A pearl necklace I had given you lay untouched in its little casket; your trunks were left corded and locked as they had been prepared for the bridal tour.
But he seemed to recollect himself presently, and smothered the storm in a brutal curse, muttered on my behalf: which, however, I took care not to notice.
I slid back the panelled sides, got in with my light, pulled them together again, and felt secure against the vigilance of Heathcliff, and every one else.
Seventy times seven times have I plucked up my hat and been about to depart—Seventy times seven times have you preposterously forced me to resume my seat.
Keep out of the yard, though, the dogs are unchained; and the house—Juno mounts sentinel there, and—nay, you can only ramble about the steps and passages.
In the morning he rose early; and, as it was a holiday, carried his ill-humour on to the moors; not re-appearing till the family were departed for church.
I had not the heart to leave my charge; and besides, you know, I had been his foster-sister, and excused his behaviour more readily than a stranger would.
Now, before I tell you whether it was a consent or denial, you tell me which it ought to have been.”

“Really, Miss Catherine, how can I know?” I replied.
Is it?”

“Yes, Heathcliff,” he replied, glancing from me up to the windows, which reflected a score of glittering moons, but showed no lights from within.
“What now?” said Catherine, leaning back, and returning his look with a suddenly clouded brow: her humour was a mere vane for constantly varying caprices.
Mr. Linton was not far behind; he opened the gate himself and sauntered slowly up, probably enjoying the lovely afternoon that breathed as soft as summer.
Do be quick; and stay among the trees till he is fairly in.”

“I must go, Cathy,” said Heathcliff, seeking to extricate himself from his companion’s arms.
We broke in this morning, for we heard him sporting like a horse; and there he was, laid over the settle: flaying and scalping would not have wakened him.
I shouted to her, as she had outstripped me a long way; she either did not hear or did not regard, for she still sprang on, and I was compelled to follow.
I hope you are satisfied, Miss Cathy, that you are not the person to benefit him; and that his condition of health is not occasioned by attachment to you.
Master Heathcliff received us with greater animation on this occasion: not the animation of high spirits though, nor yet of joy; it looked more like fear.
I’ve given over crying: but I’m going to kneel here, at your knee; and I’ll not get up, and I’ll not take my eyes from your face till you look back at me!
It was well I succeeded in removing her, for at dinner-time appeared the lawyer, having called at Wuthering Heights to get his instructions how to behave.
Leave me!”

I led my young lady out: she was too glad of her escape to resist; the other followed, and Mr. Heathcliff had the room to himself till dinner.
CHAPTER XXXIV
For some days after that evening Mr. Heathcliff shunned meeting us at meals; yet he would not consent formally to exclude Hareton and Cathy.
That afternoon lapsed in peace and harmony; and in the evening Bessie told me some of her most enchanting stories, and sang me some of her sweetest songs.
It worked and worked faster: I felt the pulses throb in my head and temples; but for nearly an hour it worked in chaos; and no result came of its efforts.
Tell me everything about them, Bessie: but sit down first; and, Bobby, come and sit on my knee, will you?” but Bobby preferred sidling over to his mother.
“But I’ll not keep you sitting up late to-night,” said she; “it is on the stroke of twelve now, and you have been travelling all day: you must feel tired.
And so you were waiting for your people when you sat on that stile?”

“For whom, sir?”

“For the men in green: it was a proper moonlight evening for them.
“Take them off to the other table, Mrs. Fairfax,” said he, “and look at them with Adèle;—you” (glancing at me) “resume your seat, and answer my questions.
“Yet,” I reflected, “she has been young once; her youth would be contemporary with her master’s: Mrs. Fairfax told me once, she had lived here many years.
All I had gathered from it amounted to this,—that there was a mystery at Thornfield; and that from participation in that mystery I was purposely excluded.
“Here, Jane!” he said; and I walked round to the other side of a large bed, which with its drawn curtains concealed a considerable portion of the chamber.
I was glad to accept her hospitality; and I submitted to be relieved of my travelling garb just as passively as I used to let her undress me when a child.
But there was something I wished to say—let me see—”

The wandering look and changed utterance told what wreck had taken place in her once vigorous frame.
He would try to make my children friendly to the little beggar: the darlings could not bear it, and he was angry with them when they showed their dislike.
I know not how she occupied herself before breakfast, but after that meal she divided her time into regular portions, and each hour had its allotted task.
“I do love you,” I said, “more than ever: but I must not show or indulge the feeling: and this is the last time I must express it.”

“The last time, Jane!
“You are too inquisitive, St. John,” murmured Mary in a low voice; but he leaned over the table and required an answer by a second firm and piercing look.
St. John continued—

“It is hard work to control the workings of inclination and turn the bent of nature; but that it may be done, I know from experience.
I naturally asked myself that question as I saw him turn to her and look at her; and, as naturally, I sought the answer to the inquiry in his countenance.
“With all his firmness and self-control,” thought I, “he tasks himself too far: locks every feeling and pang within—expresses, confesses, imparts nothing.
No.”

He drew over the picture the sheet of thin paper on which I was accustomed to rest my hand in painting, to prevent the cardboard from being sullied.
They were under a yoke,—I could free them: they were scattered,—I could reunite them: the independence, the affluence which was mine, might be theirs too.
You have introduced a topic on which our natures are at variance—a topic we should never discuss: the very name of love is an apple of discord between us.
A soft hope blent with my sorrow that soon I should dare to drop a kiss on that brow of rock, and on those lips so sternly sealed beneath it: but not yet.
I meant to become her governess once more, but I soon found this impracticable; my time and cares were now required by another—my husband needed them all.
Mr. Heathcliff may have entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping his hand out of the way when he meets a would-be acquaintance, to those which actuate me.
I let him enjoy the luxury unannoyed; and after sucking out his last wreath, and heaving a profound sigh, he got up, and departed as solemnly as he came.
A beast of a servant came up with a lantern, at last, shouting—‘Keep fast, Skulker, keep fast!’ He changed his note, however, when he saw Skulker’s game.
You have been compelled to cultivate your reflective faculties for want of occasions for frittering your life away in silly trifles.”

Mrs. Dean laughed.
whereas, if I marry Linton I can aid Heathcliff to rise, and place him out of my brother’s power.”

“With your husband’s money, Miss Catherine?” I asked.
There’s harm in being too soft, and now it’s come to this—.” And I related the scene in the court, and, as near as I dared, the whole subsequent dispute.
He shook his head, and advised that Heathcliff should be let alone; affirming, if the truth were known, Hareton would be found little else than a beggar.
But he clung to me with growing trepidation; and on Mr. Heathcliff’s taking a seat and bidding him “come hither” he hid his face on my shoulder and wept.
She then turned her attention to seeking out objects of amusement for herself, and tripped merrily on, lilting a tune to supply the lack of conversation.
Catherine Linton (the very name warms me), my bonny lass, I shall be from home all this week; go and see if have not spoken truth: do, there’s a darling!
He’s beginning to think I shall have far greater misery than he will to-night, if I believe he is the worse for my visit: and then I dare not come again.
Mr. Heathcliff started; his eye rapidly surveyed our faces, Catherine met it with her accustomed look of nervousness and yet defiance, which he abhorred.
The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine; the one who went with me appeared some years younger: the first impressed me by her voice, look, and air.
Then the scanty supply of food was distressing: with the keen appetites of growing children, we had scarcely sufficient to keep alive a delicate invalid.
She peered at me over her spectacles, and then she opened a drawer and fumbled among its contents for a long time, so long that my hopes began to falter.
Half reclined on a couch appeared Mr. Rochester, his foot supported by the cushion; he was looking at Adèle and the dog: the fire shone full on his face.
The collective appearance of the gentlemen, like that of the ladies, is very imposing: they are all costumed in black; most of them are tall, some young.
His features were regular, but too relaxed: his eye was large and well cut, but the life looking out of it was a tame, vacant life—at least so I thought.
In the midst of the tumult, and while my eyes and ears were fully engaged in the scene before me, I heard a hem close at my elbow: I turned, and saw Sam.
I must look to this other wound in the arm: she has had her teeth here too, I think.”

“She sucked the blood: she said she’d drain my heart,” said Mason.
The rain beat strongly against the panes, the wind blew tempestuously: “One lies there,” I thought, “who will soon be beyond the war of earthly elements.
But, sir, as it grew dark, the wind rose: it blew yesterday evening, not as it blows now—wild and high—but ‘with a sullen, moaning sound’ far more eerie.
I know not what dress she had on: it was white and straight; but whether gown, sheet, or shroud, I cannot tell.”

“Did you see her face?”

“Not at first.
My eye rose to his; and while I looked in his fierce face I gave an involuntary sigh; his gripe was painful, and my over-taxed strength almost exhausted.
I lay still a while: the night-wind swept over the hill and over me, and died moaning in the distance; the rain fell fast, wetting me afresh to the skin.
Now you may eat, though still not immoderately.”

“I trust I shall not eat long at your expense, sir,” was my very clumsily-contrived, unpolished answer.
But let me not hate and despise myself too much for these feelings; I know them to be wrong—that is a great step gained; I shall strive to overcome them.
I know I have always loved my own sisters; and I know on what my affection for them is grounded,—respect for their worth and admiration of their talents.
By degrees, he acquired a certain influence over me that took away my liberty of mind: his praise and notice were more restraining than his indifference.
Diana, who chanced to be in a frolicsome humour (she was not painfully controlled by his will; for hers, in another way, was as strong), exclaimed—

“St.
If so there must be more of her.”

The muscular hand broke from my custody; my arm was seized, my shoulder—neck—waist—I was entwined and gathered to him.
Besides, there is that peculiar voice of hers, so animating and piquant, as well as soft: it cheers my withered heart; it puts life into it.—What, Janet!
CHAPTER VI
Mr. Hindley came home to the funeral; and—a thing that amazed us, and set the neighbours gossiping right and left—he brought a wife with him.
I waited behind her chair, and was pained to behold Catherine, with dry eyes and an indifferent air, commence cutting up the wing of a goose before her.
Cathy begged that he might be liberated then, as Isabella Linton had no partner: her entreaties were vain, and I was appointed to supply the deficiency.
My companion, sitting on the ground, was prevented by the back of the settle from remarking his presence or departure; but I started, and bade her hush!
Mr. Heathcliff is not a fiend: he has an honourable soul, and a true one, or how could he remember her?”

“Banish him from your thoughts, Miss,” I said.
“But I have one, and you have seen him before too; and, though your nurse is in a hurry, I think both you and she would be the better for a little rest.
The letter was finished and forwarded to its destination by a milk-fetcher who came from the village; but that I didn’t learn till some time afterwards.
We entered the farm-house by the kitchen way, to ascertain whether Mr. Heathcliff were really absent: because I put slight faith in his own affirmation.
Then he walked so feebly, and looked so pale, that I immediately exclaimed,—“Why, Master Heathcliff, you are not fit for enjoying a ramble this morning.
He looked up, seized with a sort of surprise at her boldness; or, possibly, reminded, by her voice and glance, of the person from whom she inherited it.
“Well, I shall put it here,” she said, “in the table-drawer; and I’m going to bed.”

Then she whispered me to watch whether he touched it, and departed.
Now, I perceived he was not looking at the wall; for when I regarded him alone, it seemed exactly that he gazed at something within two yards’ distance.
“I hope that sigh is from the heart, and that you repent of ever having been the occasion of discomfort to your excellent benefactress.”

“Benefactress!
In half-an-hour the carrier was to call for it to take it to Lowton, whither I myself was to repair at an early hour the next morning to meet the coach.
)—Go, then, into the library; take a candle with you; leave the door open; sit down to the piano, and play a tune.”

I departed, obeying his directions.
He thought himself her idol, ugly as he was: he believed, as he said, that she preferred his “taille d’athlète” to the elegance of the Apollo Belvidere.
I filled a wine-glass (I saw Miss Ingram watch me frowningly as I did so: she thought I was taking a liberty, I daresay), and I returned to the library.
I still felt as a wanderer on the face of the earth; but I experienced firmer trust in myself and my own powers, and less withering dread of oppression.
I declare she talked to me once like something mad, or like a fiend—no child ever spoke or looked as she did; I was glad to get her away from the house.
I that evening shut my eyes resolutely against the future: I stopped my ears against the voice that kept warning me of near separation and coming grief.
It was as if a band of Italian days had come from the South, like a flock of glorious passenger birds, and lighted to rest them on the cliffs of Albion.
It was not without a certain wild pleasure I ran before the wind, delivering my trouble of mind to the measureless air-torrent thundering through space.
There were no groomsmen, no bridesmaids, no relatives to wait for or marshal: none but Mr. Rochester and I. Mrs. Fairfax stood in the hall as we passed.
“But I am not angry, Jane: I only love you too well; and you had steeled your little pale face with such a resolute, frozen look, I could not endure it.
“A wind fresh from Europe blew over the ocean and rushed through the open casement: the storm broke, streamed, thundered, blazed, and the air grew pure.
Four arms spring from its summit: the nearest town to which these point is, according to the inscription, distant ten miles; the farthest, above twenty.
In such a voice as might be expected from a hopeless heart and fainting frame—a voice wretchedly low and faltering—I asked if a servant was wanted here?
Don’t cling so tenaciously to ties of the flesh; save your constancy and ardour for an adequate cause; forbear to waste them on trite transient objects.
Having stifled my sobs, wiped my eyes, and muttered something about not being very well that morning, I resumed my task, and succeeded in completing it.
He would not want me to love him; and if I showed the feeling, he would make me sensible that it was a superfluity, unrequired by him, unbecoming in me.
I followed it, expecting soon to reach the dwelling; but it stretched on and on, it wound far and farther: no sign of habitation or grounds was visible.
Wuthering Heights
by Emily Brontë
CHAPTER I
1801—I have just returned from a visit to my landlord—the solitary neighbour that I shall be troubled with.
what a sermon; divided into four hundred and ninety parts, each fully equal to an ordinary address from the pulpit, and each discussing a separate sin!
Miss Cathy had been sick, and that made her still; she leant against her father’s knee, and Heathcliff was lying on the floor with his head in her lap.
She kissed me gently: I was all flour making the Christmas cake, and it would not have done to give me a hug; and then she looked round for Heathcliff.
“There’s a little cake for each of you, nearly enough; and you’ll need half-an-hour’s donning.”

I waited five minutes, but getting no answer left him.
He had room in his heart only for two idols—his wife and himself: he doted on both, and adored one, and I couldn’t conceive how he would bear the loss.
My great miseries in this world have been Heathcliff’s miseries, and I watched and felt each from the beginning: my great thought in living is himself.
So don’t talk of our separation again: it is impracticable; and—”

She paused, and hid her face in the folds of my gown; but I jerked it forcibly away.
It’s surely no great cause of alarm that Heathcliff should take a moonlight saunter on the moors, or even lie too sulky to speak to us in the hay-loft.
I know he couldn’t love a Linton; and yet he’d be quite capable of marrying your fortune and expectations: avarice is growing with him a besetting sin.
The sun shone yellow on its grey head, reminding me of summer; and I cannot say why, but all at once a gush of child’s sensations flowed into my heart.
She had never spoken a word to her sister-in-law for three days; but she had likewise dropped her fretful complaining, and we found it a great comfort.
A deliberate deceiver.”

“Who is, Nelly?” said Catherine’s voice at my elbow: I had been over-intent on watching the pair outside to mark her entrance.
* * * * *

DEAR ELLEN, it begins,—I came last night to Wuthering Heights, and heard, for the first time, that Catherine has been, and is yet, very ill.
Then he took the two horses, and led them into the stables; reappearing for the purpose of locking the outer gate, as if we lived in an ancient castle.
And yet it is poorly learnt; for this morning she announced, as a piece of appalling intelligence, that I had actually succeeded in making her hate me!
“I’ll smash it!” she continued, striking it with childish spite, “and then I’ll burn it!” and she took and dropped the misused article among the coals.
We should be at them: the Grange park-fence is a great way off now.”

“Oh, a little further—only a little further, Ellen,” was her answer, continually.
Catherine had reached her full height; her figure was both plump and slender, elastic as steel, and her whole aspect sparkling with health and spirits.
He bid her add a spoonful of wine from a bottle on the table; and having swallowed a small portion, appeared more tranquil, and said she was very kind.
she did!” sang Linton, sinking into the recess of his chair, and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitation of the other disputant, who stood behind.
However, she shall not disturb you again; and perhaps you’ll get quieter when we leave you.”

“Must I go?” asked Catherine dolefully, bending over him.
“Oh, I’ll take good care,” I continued: “I’ll have that lock mended, and you can escape by no way else.”

“I can get over the wall,” she said laughing.
I trotted up their garden, and was turning round to the back, when that fellow Earnshaw met me, took my bridle, and bid me go in by the front entrance.
And what quite confounded me, when he did open his mouth, it was to utter the falsehood that I had occasioned the uproar, and Hareton was not to blame!
“It was for your sake I came; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you refuse.”

“Give me some tea, I’m thirsty, and then I’ll tell you,” he answered.
But I was rendered dumb in the middle of the first sentence, by a threat that I should be shown into a room by myself the very next syllable I uttered.
CHAPTER XXVIII
On the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, a different step approached—lighter and shorter; and, this time, the person entered the room.
Aid was near him: Eliza and Georgiana had run for Mrs. Reed, who was gone upstairs: she now came upon the scene, followed by Bessie and her maid Abbot.
It tarried, however: days and weeks passed: I had regained my normal state of health, but no new allusion was made to the subject over which I brooded.
Because it is the truth
Ere I had finished this reply, my soul began to expand, to exult, with the strangest sense of freedom, of triumph, I ever felt.
She sat down on the ground near me, embraced her knees with her arms, and rested her head upon them; in that attitude she remained silent as an Indian.
Two wax candles stood lighted on the table, and two on the mantelpiece; basking in the light and heat of a superb fire, lay Pilot—Adèle knelt near him.
Pain, shame, ire, impatience, disgust, detestation, seemed momentarily to hold a quivering conflict in the large pupil dilating under his ebon eyebrow.
Presently the chambers gave up their fair tenants one after another: each came out gaily and airily, with dress that gleamed lustrous through the dusk.
Kneel again on the rug.”

“Don’t keep me long; the fire scorches me.”

She did not stoop towards me, but only gazed, leaning back in her
chair
I knelt.
Yes, it makes me impatient to hear you: but, however, you have suffered, and are likely to suffer enough for not taking my advice; so I’ll say no more.
In answer to my inquiries after the use of this article, she informed me it was a covering for the altar of a new church lately erected near Gateshead.
But I really thought he came in here five minutes ago, and said that in a month you would be his wife.”

“He has said the same thing to me,” I replied.
I walked a little while on the pavement after tea, thinking of you; and I beheld you in imagination so near me, I scarcely missed your actual presence.
Her mother, the Creole, was both a madwoman and a drunkard!—as I found out after I had wed the daughter: for they were silent on family secrets before.
At last he mastered her arms; Grace Poole gave him a cord, and he pinioned them behind her: with more rope, which was at hand, he bound her to a chair.
She and the surgeon, Carter (who dressed Mason’s wounds that night he was stabbed and worried), are the only two I have ever admitted to my confidence.
In a few months, it is possible, the happiness of seeing progress, and a change for the better in my scholars may substitute gratification for disgust.
No; they not only live, but reign and redeem: and without their divine influence spread everywhere, you would be in hell—the hell of your own meanness.
But as it is, either our union must be consecrated and sealed by marriage, or it cannot exist: practical obstacles oppose themselves to any other plan.
I say again, I will be your curate, if you like, but never your wife.”

Again he turned lividly pale; but, as before, controlled his passion perfectly.
I humbly entreat my Redeemer to give me strength to lead henceforth a purer life than I have done hitherto!”

Then he stretched his hand out to be led.
No fear of death will darken St. John’s last hour: his mind will be unclouded, his heart will be undaunted, his hope will be sure, his faith steadfast.
It was so dark that I could not see the means of exit; and, as I wandered round, I heard another specimen of their civil behaviour amongst each other.
It is incredible: it cannot be.”

As he spoke he took the servant to the door, and then repeated his demand to know her reasons for such an assertion.
“If there’s to be fresh ortherings—just when I getten used to two maisters, if I mun hev’ a mistress set o’er my heead, it’s like time to be flitting.
She bent round to look at him; he would not permit it: turning abruptly, he walked to the fireplace, where he stood, silent, with his back towards us.
It seemed so dismal to go upstairs, with the wild snow blowing outside, and my thoughts continually reverting to the kirk-yard and the new-made grave!
“Could you believe in the existence of such a colossal dunce?”

“Is he all as he should be?” asked Miss Cathy, seriously; “or is he simple: not right?
CHAPTER XXIII
The rainy night had ushered in a misty morning—half frost, half drizzle—and temporary brooks crossed our path—gurgling from the uplands.
I said her days were divided between us; but the master retired early, and I generally needed nothing after six o’clock, thus the evening was her own.
“I know how to chastise children, you see,” said the scoundrel, grimly, as he stooped to repossess himself of the key, which had dropped to the floor.
Catherine was near distraught: still, she persisted that she must go home, and tried entreaty in her turn, persuading him to subdue his selfish agony.
She never shall!—she may cry, and be sick as much as she pleases!”

He resumed his former occupation, closing his lids, as if he meant to drop asleep.
I fancy he fretted a great deal, and moaned hisseln night and day; and she had precious little rest: one could guess by her white face and heavy eyes.
They’re allas three wick’ after other folk wi’ ther harvest.”

“Gimmerton?” I repeated—my residence in that locality had already grown dim and dreamy.
Missis was rather too hard.”

Sarah came back with her; they both went to bed; they were whispering together for half-an-hour before they fell asleep.
Come here, Miss Jane: your name is Jane, is it not?”

“Yes, sir, Jane Eyre.”

“Well, you have been crying, Miss Jane Eyre; can you tell me what about?
I opened the glass-door in the breakfast-room: the shrubbery was quite still: the black frost reigned, unbroken by sun or breeze, through the grounds.
These ladies were deferentially received by Miss Temple, as Mrs. and the Misses Brocklehurst, and conducted to seats of honour at the top of the room.
Miss Temple’s whole attention was absorbed by the patients: she lived in the sick-room, never quitting it except to snatch a few hours’ rest at night.
Many, already smitten, went home only to die: some died at the school, and were buried quietly and quickly, the nature of the malady forbidding delay.
that, doubtless, was the name of her house: a neat orderly spot, I was sure; though I failed in my efforts to conceive a correct plan of the premises.
Dread remorse when you are tempted to err, Miss Eyre; remorse is the poison of life.”

“Repentance is said to be its cure, sir.”

“It is not its cure.
Adèle, who appeared to be still under the influence of a most solemnising impression, sat down, without a word, on the footstool I pointed out to her.
One of the gentlemen, Mr. Eshton, observing me, seemed to propose that I should be asked to join them; but Lady Ingram instantly negatived the notion.
An easy-chair was near the bed-head: a man sat in it, dressed with the exception of his coat; he was still; his head leant back; his eyes were closed.
“Now,” said he, “go to the other side of the bed while I order his toilet; but don’t leave the room: you may be wanted again.”

I retired as directed.
If I dared, I’d touch you, to see if you are substance or shadow, you elf!—but I’d as soon offer to take hold of a blue ignis fatuus light in a marsh.
However, had they been married, they would no doubt by their severity as husbands have made up for their softness as suitors; and so will you, I fear.
The old lady had been reading her morning portion of Scripture—the Lesson for the day; her Bible lay open before her, and her spectacles were upon it.
Meantime, Mr. Rochester affirmed I was wearing him to skin and bone, and threatened awful vengeance for my present conduct at some period fast coming.
His fury was wrought to the highest: he must yield to it for a moment, whatever followed; he crossed the floor and seized my arm and grasped my waist.
“Mother!” she exclaimed, “there is a woman wants me to give her these porridge.”

“Well lass,” replied a voice within, “give it her if she’s a beggar.
Shake hands.”

She put her floury and horny hand into mine; another and heartier smile illumined her rough face, and from that moment we were friends.
I could join with Diana and Mary in all their occupations; converse with them as much as they wished, and aid them when and where they would allow me.
“A year ago I was myself intensely miserable, because I thought I had made a mistake in entering the ministry: its uniform duties wearied me to death.
Wholly untaught, with faculties quite torpid, they seemed to me hopelessly dull; and, at first sight, all dull alike: but I soon found I was mistaken.
Say again you will be my brother: when you uttered the words I was satisfied, happy; repeat them, if you can, repeat them sincerely.”

“I think I can.
What aim, what purpose, what ambition in life have you now?”

“My first aim will be to clean down (do you comprehend the full force of the expression?
A spare parlour and bedroom I refurnished entirely, with old mahogany and crimson upholstery: I laid canvas on the passage, and carpets on the stairs.
I had the pleasure of feeling that my arrangements met their wishes exactly, and that what I had done added a vivid charm to their joyous return home.
By straining to satisfy St. John till my sinews ache, I shall satisfy him—to the finest central point and farthest outward circle of his expectations.
Even when within a very short distance of the manor-house, you could see nothing of it, so thick and dark grew the timber of the gloomy wood about it.
Pilot pricked up his ears when I came in: then he jumped up with a yelp and a whine, and bounded towards me: he almost knocked the tray from my hands.
His brain is first-rate, I should think not impressible, but vigorous.”

“Is he an able man, then?”

“Truly able.”

“A thoroughly educated man?”

“St.
The floor was of smooth, white stone; the chairs, high-backed, primitive structures, painted green: one or two heavy black ones lurking in the shade.
Heathcliff stood near the entrance, in his shirt and trousers; with a candle dripping over his fingers, and his face as white as the wall behind him.
And now, though I have dinner to get ready, I’ll steal time to arrange you so that Edgar Linton shall look quite a doll beside you: and that he does.
I wish I were you, because it will be all yours when there is no missis!”

“But is she very ill?” I asked, flinging down my rake and tying my bonnet.
After it was cooked, my fellow-servant and I began to quarrel who should carry some to Mr. Hindley; and we didn’t settle it till all was nearly cold.
Catherine, also, deemed it judicious to moderate her expressions of pleasure in receiving him; and he gradually established his right to be expected.
He’d better have kept his distance: my master quickly sprang erect, and struck him full on the throat a blow that would have levelled a slighter man.
“Don’t alarm him more than necessary.”

“Well, I told him to beware,” said my companion; “and he must bide the consequences of neglecting my warning!
And Catherine has a heart as deep as I have: the sea could be as readily contained in that horse-trough as her whole affection be monopolised by him.
“He’s younger than I,” she answered, after a protracted pause of meditation, “and he ought to live the longest: he will—he must live as long as I do.
He came upon us quite unexpectedly, entering by the front way, and had a full view of the whole three, ere we could raise our heads to glance at him.
My old enemies have not beaten me; now would be the precise time to revenge myself on their representatives: I could do it; and none could hinder me.
I’m not putting the question through idle curiosity, but—”

“You are putting the question through very idle curiosity,” he interrupted, with a laugh.
I distinguished Mr. Heathcliff’s step, restlessly measuring the floor, and he frequently broke the silence by a deep inspiration, resembling a groan.
To my Publishers, for the aid their tact, their energy, their practical sense and frank liberality have afforded an unknown and unrecommended Author.
When tired of this occupation, I would retire from the stairhead to the solitary and silent nursery: there, though somewhat sad, I was not miserable.
I would have asked who wanted me: I would have demanded if Mrs. Reed was there; but Bessie was already gone, and had closed the nursery-door upon me.
A pause of some seconds succeeded, filled up by the low, vague hum of numbers; Miss Miller walked from class to class, hushing this indefinite sound.
My vacations had all been spent at school: Mrs. Reed had never sent for me to Gateshead; neither she nor any of her family had ever been to visit me.
Feverish with vain labour, I got up and took a turn in the room; undrew the curtain, noted a star or two, shivered with cold, and again crept to bed.
Certainly, my associates and pursuits shall be other than they have been.”

“And better?”

“And better—so much better as pure ore is than foul dross.
I felt at times as if he were my relation rather than my master: yet he was imperious sometimes still; but I did not mind that; I saw it was his way.
She looked up, while I still gazed at her: no start, no increase or failure of colour betrayed emotion, consciousness of guilt, or fear of detection.
The servants were called in, the dining-room tables wheeled away, the lights otherwise disposed, the chairs placed in a semicircle opposite the arch.
What shall I tell her?”

“Oh, I will go by all means,” I answered: and I was glad of the unexpected opportunity to gratify my much-excited curiosity.
She’s an excitable, nervous person: she construed her dream into an apparition, or something of that sort, no doubt; and has taken a fit with fright.
My fingers had fastened on her hand which lay outside the sheet: had she pressed mine kindly, I should at that moment have experienced true pleasure.
“Look at his wings,” said he, “he reminds me rather of a West Indian insect; one does not often see so large and gay a night-rover in England; there!
“It is a long way to Ireland, Janet, and I am sorry to send my little friend on such weary travels: but if I can’t do better, how is it to be helped?
I placed his arm-chair by the chimney-corner: I wheeled the table near it: I let down the curtain, and had the candles brought in ready for lighting.
Without speaking, without smiling, without seeming to recognise in me a human being, he only twined my waist with his arm and riveted me to his side.
“Aye.”

“And what is he?”

“He is a parson.”

I remembered the answer of the old housekeeper at the parsonage, when I had asked to see the clergyman.
I had learnt her whole character, which was without mystery or disguise: she was coquettish but not heartless; exacting, but not worthlessly selfish.
I pondered the mystery a minute or two; but finding it insolvable, and being certain it could not be of much moment, I dismissed, and soon forgot it.
“If it were not such a very wild night,” he said, “I would send Hannah down to keep you company: you look too desperately miserable to be left alone.
St. John was not a man to be lightly refused: you felt that every impression made on him, either for pain or pleasure, was deep-graved and permanent.
He never omitted the ceremony afterwards, and the gravity and quiescence with which I underwent it, seemed to invest it for him with a certain charm.
Renewed hope followed renewed effort: it shone like the former for some weeks, then, like it, it faded, flickered: not a line, not a word reached me.
“Your wish is reasonable, and I am far from regarding you as a stranger.”

This, spoken in a cool, tranquil tone, was mortifying and baffling enough.
I listened doubtingly an instant; detected the disturber, then turned and dozed, and dreamt again: if possible, still more disagreeably than before.
“And who showed you up into this room?” he continued, crushing his nails into his palms, and grinding his teeth to subdue the maxillary convulsions.
He saw the master first, and made a hasty motion that she should be silent; which she obeyed, abruptly, on discovering the reason of his intimation.
In a few seconds she stretched herself out stiff, and turned up her eyes, while her cheeks, at once blanched and livid, assumed the aspect of death.
And Edgar standing solemnly by to see it over; then offering prayers of thanks to God for restoring peace to his house, and going back to his books!
She said nothing further till the paroxysm was over; then she continued, more kindly—

“I’m not wishing you greater torment than I have, Heathcliff.
And I partook of the infinite calm in which she lay: my mind was never in a holier frame than while I gazed on that untroubled image of Divine rest.
“I ought, and I wished to remain,” answered she, “to cheer Edgar and take care of the baby, for two things, and because the Grange is my right home.
He remarked that it was not of any moment, only she must beware of coming to her brother: she should not be with him, if he had to keep her himself.
I sud ha’ taen tent o’ t’ maister better nor him—and he warn’t deead when I left, naught o’ t’ soart!”

I insisted on the funeral being respectable.
her aunt’s death impressed her with no definite sorrow—she obliged me, by constant worrying, to walk with her down through the grounds to meet them.
His mother wer just soa—we wer a’most too mucky to sow t’ corn for makking her breead.”

“Don’t mention his mother to me,” said the master, angrily.
“My dear Miss Catherine,” I began, too vividly impressed by her recent kindness to break into a scold, “where have you been riding out at this hour?
And it is quite natural that you should desire amusement at your age; and that you would weary of nursing a sick man, and that man only your father.
“I’ve brought you something to eat,” said a voice; “oppen t’ door!”

Complying eagerly, I beheld Hareton, laden with food enough to last me all day.
“Direct me to her room immediately, or I’ll make you sing out sharply.”

“Papa would make you sing out, if you attempted to get there,” he answered.
I had a long talk with Zillah about six weeks ago, a little before you came, one day when we foregathered on the moor; and this is what she told me.
“Well, Jane Eyre, and are you a good child?”

Impossible to reply to this in the affirmative: my little world held a contrary opinion: I was silent.
Why, there are only eighty people who have heard you called so, and the world contains hundreds of millions.”

“But what have I to do with millions?
Semi-starvation and neglected colds had predisposed most of the pupils to receive infection: forty-five out of the eighty girls lay ill at one time.
I had not qualities or talents to make my way very well in the world: I should have been continually at fault.”

“But where are you going to, Helen?
At Lowood, indeed, I took that resolution, kept it, and succeeded in pleasing; but with Mrs. Reed, I remember my best was always spurned with scorn.
I cannot precisely define what they expected, but it was something pleasant: not perhaps that day or that month, but at an indefinite future period.
As I was going upstairs to fetch my portfolio and pencils, Mrs. Fairfax called to me: “Your morning school-hours are over now, I suppose,” said she.
Sometimes Leah is with her; they are frequently noisy together.”

The laugh was repeated in its low, syllabic tone, and terminated in an odd murmur.
Having once caught the bridle, he mastered it directly and sprang to his saddle; grimacing grimly as he made the effort, for it wrenched his sprain.
The hall was not dark, nor yet was it lit, only by the high-hung bronze lamp; a warm glow suffused both it and the lower steps of the oak staircase.
She would have Sophie to look over all her “toilettes,” as she called frocks; to furbish up any that were “passées,” and to air and arrange the new.
Miss Ingram, as before, was the only lady equestrian; and, as before, Mr. Rochester galloped at her side; the two rode a little apart from the rest.
“I want you,” he said: “come this way: take your time, and make no noise.”

My slippers were thin: I could walk the matted floor as softly as a cat.
He glided up the gallery and up the stairs, and stopped in the dark, low corridor of the fateful third storey: I had followed and stood at his side.
“How is Mrs. Reed?” I asked soon, looking calmly at Georgiana, who thought fit to bridle at the direct address, as if it were an unexpected liberty.
I hear a nightingale warbling in a wood half a mile off; no moving form is visible, no coming step audible; but that perfume increases: I must flee.
The carriage was ready: they were bringing it round to the front, and my master was pacing the pavement, Pilot following him backwards and forwards.
Dark as it was getting, I could still see these changes, though but as mere alternations of light and shade; for colour had faded with the daylight.
His eyes were large and blue, with brown lashes; his high forehead, colourless as ivory, was partially streaked over by careless locks of fair hair.
There is something brave in your spirit, as well as penetrating in your eye; but allow me to assure you that you partially misinterpret my emotions.
Literally, he lived only to aspire—after what was good and great, certainly; but still he would never rest, nor approve of others resting round him.
“This parlour is not his sphere,” I reflected: “the Himalayan ridge or Caffre bush, even the plague-cursed Guinea Coast swamp would suit him better.
I shall be absent a fortnight—take that space of time to consider my offer: and do not forget that if you reject it, it is not me you deny, but God.
You never shall go: you have not consented, have you, Jane?”

“I have refused to marry him—”

“And have consequently displeased him?” she suggested.
They used to watch him—servants will, you know, ma’am—and he set store on her past everything: for all, nobody but him thought her so very handsome.
Iron gates between granite pillars showed me where to enter, and passing through them, I found myself at once in the twilight of close-ranked trees.
“Is Heathcliff not here?” she demanded, pulling off her gloves, and displaying fingers wonderfully whitened with doing nothing and staying indoors.
Excepting a few provincialisms of slight consequence, you have no marks of the manners which I am habituated to consider as peculiar to your class.
I’m on the point, sometimes, of complaining that they—but I’ll not—”

“That they what?” cried Catherine, gazing at him with a troubled countenance.
How can I tell whet ye say?”

“I say, I wish you to come with me into the house!” I cried, thinking him deaf, yet highly disgusted at his rudeness.
I had found shelter in Hareton’s room, and the old man, on seeing me, said,—“They’s rahm for boath ye un’ yer pride, now, I sud think i’ the hahse.
I was in the condition of mind to be shocked at nothing: in fact, I was as reckless as some malefactors show themselves at the foot of the gallows.
That housekeeper left, if I recollect rightly, two years after he came; and another, whom I did not know, was her successor; she lives there still.
It was not the case, in reality, I am aware; but it was, in my imagination, that dismal night; and I thought Heathcliff himself less guilty than I.
I rose, and, from a gentlemanly idea of relieving his embarrassment, took up my station in the doorway, surveying the external prospect as I stood.
I’ve wondered more than once what brought you here.”

“An idle whim, I fear, sir,” was my answer; “or else an idle whim is going to spirit me away.
You and Hareton may, if you please, accompany me: and mind, particularly, to notice that the sexton obeys my directions concerning the two coffins!
I declined; telling him plainly that his strange talk and manner frightened me, and I had neither the nerve nor the will to be his companion alone.
In my hand I held the tract containing the sudden death of the Liar, to which narrative my attention had been pointed as to an appropriate warning.
She stood at the bottom of the long room, on the hearth; for there was a fire at each end; she surveyed the two rows of girls silently and gravely.
I have given you answers enough for the present: now I want to read.”

But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner; all re-entered the house.
“Yes.” He hoisted it on to the vehicle, which was a sort of car, and then I got in; before he shut me up, I asked him how far it was to Thornfield.
We now slowly ascended a drive, and came upon the long front of a house: candlelight gleamed from one curtained bow-window; all the rest were dark.
I think I must admit so fair a guest when it asks entrance to my heart.”

“Distrust it, sir; it is not a true angel.”

“Once more, how do you know?
Mr. Rochester, do you second my motion?”

“Madam, I support you on this point, as on every other.”

“Then on me be the onus of bringing it forward.
The afternoon was wet: a walk the party had proposed to take to see a gipsy camp, lately pitched on a common beyond Hay, was consequently deferred.
It was strange she never once adverted either to her mother’s illness, or her brother’s death, or the present gloomy state of the family prospects.
Eternity is before me: I had better tell her.—Go to my dressing-case, open it, and take out a letter you will see there.”

I obeyed her directions.
Oh, make haste!”

“Dear Mrs. Reed,” said I, as I offered her the draught she required, “think no more of all this, let it pass away from your mind.
Rochester has sent me away to the nursery.”

“Where is he?”

“In there,” pointing to the apartment she had left; and I went in, and there he stood.
I am influenced—conquered; and the influence is sweeter than I can express; and the conquest I undergo has a witchery beyond any triumph I can win.
I don’t care for the fairy: you said it was mademoiselle you would take to the moon?”

“Mademoiselle is a fairy,” he said, whispering mysteriously.
With infinite difficulty, for he was stubborn as a stone, I persuaded him to make an exchange in favour of a sober black satin and pearl-grey silk.
But presently she took my veil from its place; she held it up, gazed at it long, and then she threw it over her own head, and turned to the mirror.
Just at my bedside, the figure stopped: the fiery eyes glared upon me—she thrust up her candle close to my face, and extinguished it under my eyes.
Jane Eyre, who had been an ardent, expectant woman—almost a bride, was a cold, solitary girl again: her life was pale; her prospects were desolate.
The whole consciousness of my life lorn, my love lost, my hope quenched, my faith death-struck, swayed full and mighty above me in one sullen mass.
Entering the gate and passing the shrubs, the silhouette of a house rose to view, black, low, and rather long; but the guiding light shone nowhere.
I wonder when St. John will come home.”

“Surely he will not be long now: it is just ten (looking at a little gold watch she drew from her girdle).
Miserable I am, and must be for a time; for the catastrophe which drove me from a house I had found a paradise was of a strange and direful nature.
Mr. Oliver evidently regarded the young clergyman’s good birth, old name, and sacred profession as sufficient compensation for the want of fortune.
Would not such another ruin you?”

“I think not; and if I were, it does not much signify; I shall never be called upon to contend for such another.
If I do go with him—if I do make the sacrifice he urges, I will make it absolutely: I will throw all on the altar—heart, vitals, the entire victim.
I understood that, sitting there where I did, on the bank of heath, and with that handsome form before me, I sat at the feet of a man, erring as I.
“It was all his own courage, and a body may say, his kindness, in a way, ma’am: he wouldn’t leave the house till every one else was out before him.
If so, then certainly I delight in sacrifice.”

“And to bear with my infirmities, Jane: to overlook my deficiencies.”

“Which are none, sir, to me.
So I sought out a school conducted on a more indulgent system, and near enough to permit of my visiting her often, and bringing her home sometimes.
How I pinched and pricked myself, and rubbed my eyes, and stood up, and sat down again, and nudged Joseph to inform me if he would ever have done.
He glanced over the back of the bench, dilating his nostrils, and thought as little of exchanging civilities with me as with my companion the cat.
Inquiries were made as to how it got there; I was obliged to confess, and in recompense for my cowardice and inhumanity was sent out of the house.
That sounds ill-natured: but she was so proud it became really impossible to pity her distresses, till she should be chastened into more humility.
Open your mouth.” He held the knife in his hand, and pushed its point between my teeth: but, for my part, I was never much afraid of his vagaries.
Coming down somewhat later than usual, I saw, by the sunbeams piercing the chinks of the shutters, Miss Catherine still seated near the fireplace.
shoo sits watching for ye i’ t’ kitchen; and as yah’re in at one door, he’s out at t’other; and, then, wer grand lady goes a-courting of her side!
It took his breath for a minute; and while he choked, Mr. Linton walked out by the back door into the yard, and from thence to the front entrance.
I told him as much as I thought proper of her illness, and he extorted from me, by cross-examination, most of the facts connected with its origin.
Though I would give no information, he discovered, through some of the other servants, both her place of residence and the existence of the child.
Mr. Heathcliff said I might have my own way there too: only, he desired me to remember that the money for the whole affair came out of his pocket.
“You had better sit down in there, and entrust your message to me.”

“Which is his rahm?” pursued the fellow, surveying the range of closed doors.
I’d rather be three months ill, than hear you frame a deliberate lie.”

She sprang forward, and bursting into tears, threw her arms round my neck.
I never expected that your nerves would be disordered: they are, at present, marvellously so, however; and almost entirely through your own fault.
In five minutes more the cloud of bewilderment dissolved: I knew quite well that I was in my own bed, and that the red glare was the nursery fire.
On recognising him, the fang of the snake Jealousy was instantly broken; because at the same moment my love for Céline sank under an extinguisher.
“On the contrary,” said I, “I bolted my door.”

“Then you are not in the habit of bolting your door every night before you get into bed?”

“Fiend!
I still stood absolutely dumfoundered at what appeared to me her miraculous self-possession and most inscrutable hypocrisy, when the cook entered.
“Will no one come?” it cried; and then, while the staggering and stamping went on wildly, I distinguished through plank and plaster:—

“Rochester!
It was short, and thus conceived:—

“MADAM,—
“Will you have the goodness to send me the address of my niece, Jane Eyre, and to tell me how she is?
Mr. Rochester came thrice to my door in the course of it, to ask if I was safe and tranquil: and that was comfort, that was strength for anything.
Descending the laurel walk, I faced the wreck of the chestnut-tree; it stood up black and riven: the trunk, split down the centre, gasped ghastly.
A weakness, beginning inwardly, extending to the limbs, seized me, and I fell: I lay on the ground some minutes, pressing my face to the wet turf.
I am simply, in my original state—stripped of that blood-bleached robe with which Christianity covers human deformity—a cold, hard, ambitious man.
“Do let me speak,” I said; “let me have one moment to draw breath and reflect.” I paused—he stood before me, hat in hand, looking composed enough.
“Oh, St. John!” I cried, “have some mercy!”

I appealed to one who, in the discharge of what he believed his duty, knew neither mercy nor remorse.
My work, which had appeared so vague, so hopelessly diffuse, condensed itself as he proceeded, and assumed a definite form under his shaping hand.
I mounted to my chamber; locked myself in; fell on my knees; and prayed in my way—a different way to St. John’s, but effective in its own fashion.
Ay, dead as the stones on which her brains and blood were scattered.”

“Good God!”

“You may well say so, ma’am: it was frightful!”

He shuddered.
“Did you like him, Jane?”

“Yes, Mr. Rochester, I liked him: but you asked me that before.”

I perceived, of course, the drift of my interlocutor.
I know that a stranger’s hand will write to me next, to say that the good and faithful servant has been called at length into the joy of his Lord.
This proceeding aroused the whole hive: half-a-dozen four-footed fiends, of various sizes and ages, issued from hidden dens to the common centre.
He fixed his eye on me longer than I cared to return the stare, for fear I might be tempted either to box his ears or render my hilarity audible.
“I’m not come too soon, am I?” he said, casting a look at me: I had begun to wipe the plate, and tidy some drawers at the far end in the dresser.
The house-door was ajar, too; light entered from its unclosed windows; Hindley had come out, and stood on the kitchen hearth, haggard and drowsy.
He retained a great deal of the reserve for which his boyhood was remarkable; and that served to repress all startling demonstrations of feeling.
After constant indulgence of one’s weak nature, and the other’s bad one, I earn for thanks two samples of blind ingratitude, stupid to absurdity!
He might as well plant an oak in a flower-pot, and expect it to thrive, as imagine he can restore her to vigour in the soil of his shallow cares?
It was a sweet substitute for the yet absent murmur of the summer foliage, which drowned that music about the Grange when the trees were in leaf.
For me, grieved as I was about Catherine, it was impossible to avoid regarding this season of deliverance from degrading oppression as a holiday.
After I had done, I ventured on the unusual liberty of drawing near the fire, going round Earnshaw’s seat, and kneeling in the corner beside him.
‘Catherine used to boast that she stood between you and bodily harm: she meant that certain persons would not hurt you for fear of offending her.
The last glimpse I caught of him was a furious rush on his part, checked by the embrace of his host; and both fell locked together on the hearth.
“She might have been living yet, if it had not been for him!” was his constant bitter reflection; and, in his eyes, Heathcliff seemed a murderer.
How life will be changed, how dreary the world will be, when papa and you are dead.”

“None can tell whether you won’t die before us,” I replied.
We were reconciled; but we cried, both of us, the whole time I stayed: not entirely for sorrow; yet I was sorry Linton had that distorted nature.
“But you have been worse,” persisted his cousin; “worse than when I saw you last; you are thinner, and—”

“I’m tired,” he interrupted, hurriedly.
“But where did he come from, the little dark thing, harboured by a good man to his bane?” muttered Superstition, as I dozed into unconsciousness.
We passed through several towns, and in one, a very large one, the coach stopped; the horses were taken out, and the passengers alighted to dine.
Next day new steps were to be taken; my plans could no longer be confined to my own breast; I must impart them in order to achieve their success.
A woman who could betray me for such a rival was not worth contending for; she deserved only scorn; less, however, than I, who had been her dupe.
He passed up the gallery very softly, unclosed the staircase door with as little noise as possible, shut it after him, and the last ray vanished.
A crimson velvet robe, and a shawl turban of some gold-wrought Indian fabric, invested her (I suppose she thought) with a truly imperial dignity.
If she did, she need not coin her smiles so lavishly, flash her glances so unremittingly, manufacture airs so elaborate, graces so multitudinous.
“She wishes to know who will be her first visitor.”

“I think I had better just look in upon her before any of the ladies go,” said Colonel Dent.
The old woman’s voice had changed: her accent, her gesture, and all were familiar to me as my own face in a glass—as the speech of my own tongue.
I looked; I stirred the fire, and I looked again: but she drew her bonnet and her bandage closer about her face, and again beckoned me to depart.
“And I did not expect it: she looked so quiet at first.”

“I warned you,” was his friend’s answer; “I said—be on your guard when you go near her.
it was too late for her to make now the effort to change her habitual frame of mind: living, she had ever hated me—dying, she must hate me still.
She was just fastening my veil (the plain square of blond after all) to my hair with a brooch; I hurried from under her hands as soon as I could.
The clergyman stayed to exchange a few sentences, either of admonition or reproof, with his haughty parishioner; this duty done, he too departed.
I perceived that I was sickening from excitement and inanition; neither meat nor drink had passed my lips that day, for I had taken no breakfast.
I must part with you for my whole life: I must begin a new existence among strange faces and strange scenes.”

“Of course: I told you you should.
I waited, expecting he would say something I could at least comprehend; but his hand was now at his chin, his finger on his lip: he was thinking.
You should rather ask the name of the governess—the nature of the event which requires her appearance.”

“Did no one go to Thornfield Hall, then?
Will it keep you in England, induce you to marry Miss Oliver, and settle down like an ordinary mortal?”

“You wander: your head becomes confused.
And first I must beg you to set Hannah at liberty, and get somebody else to wait on you.”

“Do you want her?”

“Yes, to go with me to Moor House.
As I exchanged a translation for an exercise, I happened to look his way: there I found myself under the influence of the ever-watchful blue eye.
Of late it had been easy enough for me to look sad: a cankering evil sat at my heart and drained my happiness at its source—the evil of suspense.
To me, he was in reality become no longer flesh, but marble; his eye was a cold, bright, blue gem; his tongue a speaking instrument—nothing more.
And when you go to India, will you leave me so, without a kinder word than you have yet spoken?”

He now turned quite from the moon and faced me.
“I must indeed,” I said; “for when just now I repeated the offer of serving him for a deacon, he expressed himself shocked at my want of decency.
Yes, life of some kind there was; for I heard a movement—that narrow front-door was unclosing, and some shape was about to issue from the grange.
My living Jane?”

“You touch me, sir,—you hold me, and fast enough: I am not cold like a corpse, nor vacant like air, am I?”

“My living darling!
Your words have delineated very prettily a graceful Apollo: he is present to your imagination,—tall, fair, blue-eyed, and with a Grecian profile.
Long as we have been parted, hot tears as I have wept over our separation, I never thought that while I was mourning her, she was loving another!
She did not know, she answered: she had only lived there a year or two; and they had so many queer goings on, she could not begin to be curious.
“Then,” I continued, “my predecessor’s name was Linton?”

“It was.”

“And who is that Earnshaw: Hareton Earnshaw, who lives with Mr. Heathcliff?
He had been active and healthy, yet his strength left him suddenly; and when he was confined to the chimney-corner he grew grievously irritable.
“I promised mamma that I wouldn’t say one word to him, and I didn’t.”

“Well, don’t cry,” replied Catherine, contemptuously; “you’re not killed.
They go the rounds of all the respectable houses, and receive contributions every Christmas, and we esteemed it a first-rate treat to hear them.
Set two tables here, Ellen: one for your master and Miss Isabella, being gentry; the other for Heathcliff and myself, being of the lower orders.
Months of sickness could not cause such a change!”

I began to defend myself, thinking it too bad to be blamed for another’s wicked waywardness.
And she noticed the man—Heathcliff it was, she felt certain: nob’dy could mistake him, besides—put a sovereign in her father’s hand for payment.
Heathcliff guessed the meaning of her manoeuvres, and said—“If you have got anything for Isabella (as no doubt you have, Nelly), give it to her.
I don’t think the master can see him.”

Joseph had advanced through the kitchen as I uttered these words, and now presented himself in the hall.
She affirmed he would be better in a bit, but he couldn’t do with that shrieking and din; and she took me, and nearly carried me into the house.
The funeral was hurried over; Catherine, Mrs. Linton Heathcliff now, was suffered to stay at the Grange till her father’s corpse had quitted it.
Catherine was waxing cross at this; but he found means to make her hold her tongue, by asking how she would like him to speak ill of her father?
Bessie asked if I would have a book: the word book acted as a transient stimulus, and I begged her to fetch Gulliver’s Travels from the library.
April advanced to May: a bright serene May it was; days of blue sky, placid sunshine, and soft western or southern gales filled up its duration.
She was occupied in knitting; a large cat sat demurely at her feet; nothing in short was wanting to complete the beau-ideal of domestic comfort.
“You play a little, I see; like any other English school-girl; perhaps rather better than some, but not well.”

I closed the piano and returned.
“I am not fond of the prattle of children,” he continued; “for, old bachelor as I am, I have no pleasant associations connected with their lisp.
The ease of his manner freed me from painful restraint: the friendly frankness, as correct as cordial, with which he treated me, drew me to him.
“I wonder whether the master—”

The charwoman was going on; but here Leah turned and perceived me, and she instantly gave her companion a nudge.
Creatures so absorbed in care about their pretty faces, and their white hands, and their small feet; as if a man had anything to do with beauty!
Some of the gentlemen were gone to the stables: the younger ones, together with the younger ladies, were playing billiards in the billiard-room.
Again I looked at the face; which was no longer turned from me—on the contrary, the bonnet was doffed, the bandage displaced, the head advanced.
He still waited; he held a key in his hand: approaching one of the small, black doors, he put it in the lock; he paused, and addressed me again.
This was a full-blown, very plump damsel, fair as waxwork, with handsome and regular features, languishing blue eyes, and ringleted yellow hair.
But I was determined not to seem at a loss for occupation or amusement: I had brought my drawing materials with me, and they served me for both.
I never saw a busier person than she seemed to be; yet it was difficult to say what she did: or rather, to discover any result of her diligence.
The chill of Mrs. Fairfax’s warnings, and the damp of her doubts were upon me: something of unsubstantiality and uncertainty had beset my hopes.
I heard the gallop of a horse at a distance on the road; I was sure it was you; and you were departing for many years and for a distant country.
Wood, close your book and take off your surplice; John Green (to the clerk), leave the church: there will be no wedding to-day.” The man obeyed.
I lifted up my head to look: the roof resolved to clouds, high and dim; the gleam was such as the moon imparts to vapours she is about to sever.
“Did she know of any place in the neighbourhood where a servant was wanted?”

“Nay; she couldn’t say.”

“What was the chief trade in this place?
I cannot call them handsome—they were too pale and grave for the word: as they each bent over a book, they looked thoughtful almost to severity.
There was a difference amongst them as amongst the educated; and when I got to know them, and they me, this difference rapidly developed itself.
Twenty thousand pounds shared equally would be five thousand each, justice—enough and to spare: justice would be done,—mutual happiness secured.
He also advised me to be composed; I scorned the insinuation of helplessness and distraction, shook off his hand, and began to walk about again.
“Very willingly,” he rejoined; and rising, he strode a little distance up the pass, threw himself down on a swell of heath, and there lay still.
The house presented two pointed gables in its front; the windows were latticed and narrow: the front door was narrow too, one step led up to it.
Whatever—whoever you are—be perceptible to the touch or I cannot live!”

He groped; I arrested his wandering hand, and prisoned it in both mine.
I found him very intelligent on the topics we touched; and before I went home, I was encouraged so far as to volunteer another visit to-morrow.
Here is the consequence of being buried alive: she has thrown herself away upon that boor from sheer ignorance that better individuals existed!
He complained so seldom, indeed, of such stirs as these, that I really thought him not vindictive: I was deceived completely, as you will hear.
What in the world led you wandering to Thrushcross Grange?” “Let me get off my wet clothes, and I’ll tell you all about it, Nelly,” he replied.
“They are good children, no doubt, and don’t deserve the treatment you receive, for your bad conduct.” “Don’t cant, Nelly,” he said: “nonsense!
Let me alone, and I’ll plan it out: while I’m thinking of that I don’t feel pain.”

“But, Mr. Lockwood, I forget these tales cannot divert you.
Mention of Kenneth caused her to exclaim, instantly, that her health was perfect, and it was only Catherine’s harshness which made her unhappy.
Next time you may gather intelligence for yourself!”

“The next time you bring a tale to me you shall quit my service, Ellen Dean,” he replied.
I’ll make her howl a recantation!”

A maniac’s fury kindled under her brows; she struggled desperately to disengage herself from Linton’s arms.
You needn’t make a secret of it: we have no secrets between us.”

“Oh, I have nothing,” I replied, thinking it best to speak the truth at once.
Isabella was dead; and he wrote to bid me get mourning for his daughter, and arrange a room, and other accommodations, for his youthful nephew.
I proceeded to remove Linton’s cap and mantle, and placed him on a chair by the table; but he was no sooner seated than he began to cry afresh.
If you had remembered that Hareton was your cousin as much as Master Heathcliff, you would have felt how improper it was to behave in that way.
“‘Miss Catherine, I’m ill grieved,’ he began, ‘but it’s rayther too bad—’

“I gave him a cut with my whip, thinking perhaps he would murder me.
I could; and I bit my lip in spite, at having thrown away the chance I might have had of doing something besides staring at its smiting beauty.
I’ll try!”

She placed one she had been perusing on his hand; he flung it off, and muttered, if she did not give over, he would break her neck.
Catherine employed herself in wrapping a handsome book neatly in white paper, and having tied it with a bit of ribbon, and addressed it to “Mr.
I came in to sit with them, after I had done my work; and I felt so soothed and comforted to watch them, that I did not notice how time got on.
That, however, which you may suppose the most potent to arrest my imagination, is actually the least: for what is not connected with her to me?
I uttered an ejaculation of discontent at seeing the dismal grate, and commenced shutting the casements, one after another, till I came to his.
He probably raised the phantoms from thinking, as he traversed the moors alone, on the nonsense he had heard his parents and companions repeat.
I looked round the convent-like garden, and then up at the house—a large building, half of which seemed grey and old, the other half quite new.
It is in vain to say human beings ought to be satisfied with tranquillity: they must have action; and they will make it if they cannot find it.
I had it still before me when I entered Hay, and slipped the letter into the post-office; I saw it as I walked fast down-hill all the way home.
Mr. Rochester, as he sat in his damask-covered chair, looked different to what I had seen him look before; not quite so stern—much less gloomy.
He took it from my hand, held it up, and surveyed the bed, all blackened and scorched, the sheets drenched, the carpet round swimming in water.
Her black satin dress, her scarf of rich foreign lace, and her pearl ornaments, pleased me better than the rainbow radiance of the titled dame.
He is beset by sharpers: John is sunk and degraded—his look is frightful—I feel ashamed for him when I see him.”

She was getting much excited.
And if God had gifted me with some beauty and much wealth, I should have made it as hard for you to leave me, as it is now for me to leave you.
They were both more accomplished and better read than I was; but with eagerness I followed in the path of knowledge they had trodden before me.
The blaze there has thawed all the snow from your cloak; by the same token, it has streamed on to my floor, and made it like a trampled street.
I have watched you this half hour from the window; you must forgive my being such a spy, but for a long time I have fancied I hardly know what.
God give you strength to choose that better part which shall not be taken from you!”

He laid his hand on my head as he uttered the last words.
When his first-born was put into his arms, he could see that the boy had inherited his own eyes, as they once were—large, brilliant, and black.
“Wuthering” being a significant provincial adjective, descriptive of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed in stormy weather.
“Were you asked to tea?” she demanded, tying an apron over her neat black frock, and standing with a spoonful of the leaf poised over the pot.
There she lay dashing her head against the arm of the sofa, and grinding her teeth, so that you might fancy she would crash them to splinters!
I had no command of tongue, or brain, and he did not guess my agony, perhaps: it barely left me sense to try to escape from him and his voice.
“Look!” she cried eagerly, “that’s my room with the candle in it, and the trees swaying before it; and the other candle is in Joseph’s garret.
“Look here!” he replied, pulling from his waistcoat a curiously-constructed pistol, having a double-edged spring knife attached to the barrel.
I have avoided, up to this period, giving her the slightest right to claim a separation; and, what’s more, she’d thank nobody for dividing us.
‘But leaving out my arm, every inch of me is as sore as if I had been fighting with a legion of imps!’

“‘Yes, no wonder,’ was my next remark.
One can’t help missing an old companion: though he had the worst tricks with him that ever man imagined, and has done me many a rascally turn.
She’s here safe: but I’m glad it isn’t the master.”

“He is not at home then, is he?” I panted, quite breathless with quick walking and alarm.
And he never said Miss: he should have done, shouldn’t he, if he’s a servant?”

Hareton grew black as a thunder-cloud at this childish speech.
The latter saw me looking; and having shaken hands, advised me to close the door, and leave him undisturbed; for the journey had fatigued him.
“Since you are in the habit of passing dreadful nights,” I said, “it won’t be Miss who spoils your ease: you’d be the same had she never come.
I am worthless, and bad in temper, and bad in spirit, almost always; and, if you choose, you may say good-bye: you’ll get rid of an annoyance.
I never thought but you were sunk in the Blackhorse marsh, and missy with you, till master told me you’d been found, and he’d lodged you here!
Besides, I could spare a day easily to arrange matters with my landlord, and thus save myself the trouble of invading the neighbourhood again.
And I noticed another, by the aid of my nostrils; a fragrance of stocks and wallflowers wafted on the air from amongst the homely fruit-trees.
He dared not speak to her there: he dared hardly look; and yet she went on teasing, till he was twice on the point of being provoked to laugh.
About her I won’t speak; and I don’t desire to think; but I earnestly wish she were invisible: her presence invokes only maddening sensations.
I could not answer the ceaseless inward question—why I thus suffered; now, at the distance of—I will not say how many years, I see it clearly.
This idea, consolatory in theory, I felt would be terrible if realised: with all my might I endeavoured to stifle it—I endeavoured to be firm.
I kept expecting that Miss Scatcherd would praise her attention; but, instead of that, she suddenly cried out—

“You dirty, disagreeable girl!
Miss Temple told Helen Burns to be seated in a low arm-chair on one side of the hearth, and herself taking another, she called me to her side.
“You’ve brought your luggage with you, haven’t you, my dear?”

“Yes, ma’am.”

“I’ll see it carried into your room,” she said, and bustled out.
It is thoughtless to condemn them, or laugh at them, if they seek to do more or learn more than custom has pronounced necessary for their sex.
Will you?”

I smiled: I thought to myself Mr. Rochester is peculiar—he seems to forget that he pays me £30 per annum for receiving his orders.
Do you think Mr. Rochester will send for us by-and-bye, after dinner?”

“No, indeed, I don’t; Mr. Rochester has something else to think about.
I’ll tell you how to manage so as to avoid the embarrassment of making a formal entrance, which is the most disagreeable part of the business.
“But my curiosity will be past its appetite; it craves food now.”

“Ask Blanche; she is nearer you than I.”

“Oh, don’t refer him to me, mama!
Your witch’s skill is rather at fault sometimes.”

“What the devil have you seen, then?”

“Never mind: I came here to inquire, not to confess.
Feeling without judgment is a washy draught indeed; but judgment untempered by feeling is too bitter and husky a morsel for human deglutition.
It would not be wicked to love me.”

“It would to obey you.”

A wild look raised his brows—crossed his features: he rose; but he forebore yet.
She shook her head, she “was sorry she could give me no information,” and the white door closed, quite gently and civilly: but it shut me out.
“Yes.”

“Was the clergyman in?”

“No.”

“Would he be in soon?”

“No, he was gone from home.”

“To a distance?”

“Not so far—happen three mile.
These could already read, write, and sew; and to them I taught the elements of grammar, geography, history, and the finer kinds of needlework.
if all you doubt is my sincerity, I am easy: you see the justice of the case?”

“I do see a certain justice; but it is contrary to all custom.
Besides, the entire fortune is your right: my uncle gained it by his own efforts; he was free to leave it to whom he would: he left it to you.
I feel I can easily and naturally make room in my heart for you, as my third and youngest sister.”

“Thank you: that contents me for to-night.
“What affectation of diffidence was this at first?” they might have demanded; “what stupid regardlessness now?”

Hear an illustration, reader.
“The rain is over and gone, and there is a tender shining after it: you shall have a walk soon.”

I had wakened the glow: his features beamed.
Cooler and fresher at the moment the gale seemed to visit my brow: I could have deemed that in some wild, lone scene, I and Jane were meeting.
All my confidence is bestowed on him, all his confidence is devoted to me; we are precisely suited in character—perfect concord is the result.
He informed me then, that for some time he had fancied the obscurity clouding one eye was becoming less dense; and that now he was sure of it.
I thought her conduct must be prompted by a species of dreary fun; and, now that we were alone, I endeavoured to interest her in my distress.
The ledge, where I placed my candle, had a few mildewed books piled up in one corner; and it was covered with writing scratched on the paint.
I snuffed it off, and, very ill at ease under the influence of cold and lingering nausea, sat up and spread open the injured tome on my knee.
Two benches, shaped in sections of a circle, nearly enclosed the hearth; on one of these I stretched myself, and Grimalkin mounted the other.
Our adieux were limited to a hasty bow, and then I pushed forward, trusting to my own resources; for the porter’s lodge is untenanted as yet.
Cathy and her brother harassed me terribly: he was as uncomplaining as a lamb; though hardness, not gentleness, made him give little trouble.
She, supposing Edgar could not see her, snatched the cloth from my hand, and pinched me, with a prolonged wrench, very spitefully on the arm.
In an instant one was wrung free, and the astonished young man felt it applied over his own ear in a way that could not be mistaken for jest.
I should mention that Isabella sent to her brother, some six weeks from her departure, a short note, announcing her marriage with Heathcliff.
Come here now, Nelly: I must either persuade or compel you to aid me in fulfilling my determination to see Catherine, and that without delay.
Her husband lies in the same spot now; and they have each a simple headstone above, and a plain grey block at their feet, to mark the graves.
But he was too much on the alert to be cheated: as I closed the door, I heard a cry, and a frantic repetition of the words—

“Don’t leave me!
I’ll not come here, then; he shall come to the Grange.”

“It will be too far for me,” murmured her cousin: “to walk four miles would kill me.
The invalid complained of being covered with ashes; but he had a tiresome cough, and looked feverish and ill, so I did not rebuke his temper.
You were mighty eager to set off, but your longing to see poor Linton has soon evaporated!”

“Why did he wish to see me?” returned Catherine.
I did not mind their skirmishes: but Hareton was often obliged to seek the kitchen also, when the master wanted to have the house to himself!
I was a discord in Gateshead Hall: I was like nobody there; I had nothing in harmony with Mrs. Reed or her children, or her chosen vassalage.
The equality between her and me was real; not the mere result of condescension on her part: so much the better—my position was all the freer.
Little things recall us to earth; the clock struck in the hall; that sufficed; I turned from moon and stars, opened a side-door, and went in.
I sought in her countenance and features a likeness to Mr. Rochester, but found none: no trait, no turn of expression announced relationship.
She shut her book and slowly looked up; her hat-brim partially shaded her face, yet I could see, as she raised it, that it was a strange one.
The candle, wasted at last, went out; as it expired, I perceived streaks of grey light edging the window curtains: dawn was then approaching.
Neglect it—go on as heretofore, craving, whining, and idling—and suffer the results of your idiocy, however bad and insufferable they may be.
I did not like to walk at this hour alone with Mr. Rochester in the shadowy orchard; but I could not find a reason to allege for leaving him.
Again and again he said, “Are you happy, Jane?” And again and again I answered, “Yes.” After which he murmured, “It will atone—it will atone.
Mr. Rochester looks as young, and is as young, as some men at five-and-twenty.”

“Is it really for love he is going to marry you?” she asked.
With anxiety I watched his eye rove over the gay stores: he fixed on a rich silk of the most brilliant amethyst dye, and a superb pink satin.
Something had happened which I could not comprehend; no one knew of or had seen the event but myself: it had taken place the preceding night.
Gentlemen, my plan is broken up:—what this lawyer and his client say is true: I have been married, and the woman to whom I was married lives!
You have as good as said that I am a married man—as a married man you will shun me, keep out of my way: just now you have refused to kiss me.
He looked at me long and hard: I turned my eyes from him, fixed them on the fire, and tried to assume and maintain a quiet, collected aspect.
Finding my apprehensions unfounded, however, and calmed by the deep silence that reigned as evening declined at nightfall, I took confidence.
They could not be the daughters of the elderly person at the table; for she looked like a rustic, and they were all delicacy and cultivation.
I shall leave the place probably in the course of a twelve-month; but while I do stay, I will exert myself to the utmost for its improvement.
I was a lusus naturæ, she affirmed, as a village schoolmistress: she was sure my previous history, if known, would make a delightful romance.
Now you had better go; for if you stay longer, you will perhaps irritate me afresh by some mistrustful scruple.”

“And the school, Miss Eyre?
And really, after a day or two of confusion worse confounded, it was delightful by degrees to invoke order from the chaos ourselves had made.
Well may he eschew the calm of domestic life; it is not his element: there his faculties stagnate—they cannot develop or appear to advantage.
He steals softly over the grass, careful to make no sound; he pauses—fancying she has stirred: he withdraws: not for worlds would he be seen.
In wandering round the shattered walls and through the devastated interior, I gathered evidence that the calamity was not of late occurrence.
I explained to them, in few words, that I had heard all which had happened since I left Thornfield, and that I was come to see Mr. Rochester.
The whole furniture consisted of a chair, a clothes-press, and a large oak case, with squares cut out near the top resembling coach windows.
This caused me to feel, not uncomfortable, but rather fearful (as I am still) of serious effects from the incidents of to-day and yesterday.
I persuaded him easily to let me lay the blame of his bruises on the horse: he minded little what tale was told since he had what he wanted.
Heathcliff bore his degradation pretty well at first, because Cathy taught him what she learnt, and worked or played with him in the fields.
‘Skulker has caught a little girl, sir,’ he replied; ‘and there’s a lad here,’ he added, making a clutch at me, ‘who looks an out-and-outer!
At the first finger his father laid on him, however, he shrieked again louder than before, and struggled as if he would go into convulsions.
That I set down as a speech meant for Edgar’s ears; I believed no such thing, so I kept it to myself and brought her some tea and dry toast.
Heathcliff held both bridles as they rode on, and they set their faces from the village, and went as fast as the rough roads would let them.
I want to ask you two questions: the first is,—How did you contrive to preserve the common sympathies of human nature when you resided here?
Nelly, you think you are better and more fortunate than I; in full health and strength: you are sorry for me—very soon that will be altered.
What he meant to do I cannot tell; however, the other stopped all demonstrations, at once, by placing the lifeless-looking form in his arms.
I noticed on that occasion how much selfishness there is even in a love like Mr. Linton’s, when he so regretted Catherine’s blessed release!
Do you think he could bear to see me grow fat and merry—could bear to think that we were tranquil, and not resolve on poisoning our comfort?
But Miss Catherine measured her age by months, and, “Now, am I old enough to go to Penistone Crags?” was the constant question in her mouth.
I’ll not trust you over the threshold again, you naughty, naughty girl!”

“Aha, Ellen!” she cried, gaily, jumping up and running to my side.
On the anniversary of her birth we never manifested any signs of rejoicing, because it was also the anniversary of my late mistress’s death.
“Papa says you are a wicked man, and you hate both him and me; and Ellen says the same.”

“That is nothing to the purpose,” said Heathcliff.
Perhaps, had he been aware of his nephew’s disposition and state of health, he would have seen fit to withhold even that slight consolation.
There was the same man: his dark face rather sallower and more composed, his frame a stone or two heavier, perhaps, and no other difference.
When I sat in the house with Hareton, it seemed that on going out I should meet her; when I walked on the moors I should meet her coming in.
Hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough to understand that I reject any pretence at kindness you have the hypocrisy to offer!
The work they studied was full of costly pictures; and those and their position had charm enough to keep them unmoved till Joseph came home.
The fancied object was not fixed, either: his eyes pursued it with unwearied diligence, and, even in speaking to me, were never weaned away.
I was a precocious actress in her eyes; she sincerely looked on me as a compound of virulent passions, mean spirit, and dangerous duplicity.
“You said Mr. Rochester was not strikingly peculiar, Mrs. Fairfax,” I observed, when I rejoined her in her room, after putting Adèle to bed.
And so, under pretence of softening the previous outrage, of stroking and soothing me into placidity, you stick a sly penknife under my ear!
Rochester is not likely to return soon, I suppose?”

“Indeed he is—in three days, he says: that will be next Thursday; and not alone either.
Adèle ran quite wild in the midst of it: the preparations for company and the prospect of their arrival, seemed to throw her into ecstasies.
I looked at Adèle, whose head leant against my shoulder; her eyes were waxing heavy, so I took her up in my arms and carried her off to bed.
Much too, you will think, reader, to engender jealousy: if a woman, in my position, could presume to be jealous of a woman in Miss Ingram’s.
I left the window, and moved with little noise across the carpet; as I stooped to take off my shoes, a cautious hand tapped low at the door.
The young ladies put it off at first; but their mother grew so restless, and said, ‘Jane, Jane,’ so many times, that at last they consented.
In such conversation an hour was soon gone: Bessie restored to me my bonnet, &c., and, accompanied by her, I quitted the lodge for the hall.
I felt pain, and then I felt ire; and then I felt a determination to subdue her—to be her mistress in spite both of her nature and her will.
Turning restlessly, she drew the bedclothes round her; my elbow, resting on a corner of the quilt, fixed it down: she was at once irritated.
Eliza generally took no more notice of her sister’s indolence and complaints than if no such murmuring, lounging object had been before her.
Yes, you are dripping like a mermaid; pull my cloak round you: but I think you are feverish, Jane: both your cheek and hand are burning hot.
He continued, uttering each word distinctly, calmly, steadily, but not loudly—

“It simply consists in the existence of a previous marriage.
Sure was I of His efficiency to save what He had made: convinced I grew that neither earth should perish, nor one of the souls it treasured.
Mr. St. John came but once: he looked at me, and said my state of lethargy was the result of reaction from excessive and protracted fatigue.
“If such is your spirit, I promise to aid you, in my own time and way.”

He now resumed the book with which he had been occupied before tea.
I honour endurance, perseverance, industry, talent; because these are the means by which men achieve great ends and mount to lofty eminence.
In the calm with which you learnt you had become suddenly rich, I read a mind clear of the vice of Demas:—lucre had no undue power over you.
We might have got on tolerably, notwithstanding, but for two people—Miss Cathy, and Joseph, the servant: you saw him, I daresay, up yonder.
The dog was throttled off; his huge, purple tongue hanging half a foot out of his mouth, and his pendent lips streaming with bloody slaver.
I’m shocked that my children should have heard it.’

“I recommenced cursing—don’t be angry, Nelly—and so Robert was ordered to take me off.
“He’s left th’ gate at t’ full swing, and Miss’s pony has trodden dahn two rigs o’ corn, and plottered through, raight o’er into t’ meadow!
Draw your knitting out of your pocket—that will do—now continue the history of Mr. Heathcliff, from where you left off, to the present day.
No, no, Isabella, you sha’n’t run off,” she continued, arresting, with feigned playfulness, the confounded girl, who had risen indignantly.
I must confess, that if I had been in the young lady’s place, I would, at least, have swept the hearth, and wiped the tables with a duster.
I should be in a curious taking if I surrendered my heart to that young person, and the daughter turned out a second edition of the mother.
Because misery and degradation, and death, and nothing that God or Satan could inflict would have parted us, you, of your own will, did it.
Her brow smooth, her lids closed, her lips wearing the expression of a smile; no angel in heaven could be more beautiful than she appeared.
Earnshaw swore passionately at me: affirming that I loved the villain yet; and calling me all sorts of names for the base spirit I evinced.
“Heathcliff did not glance my way, and I gazed up, and contemplated his features almost as confidently as if they had been turned to stone.
As soon as she supposed me absorbed in my occupation, she recommenced her silent weeping: it appeared, at present, her favourite diversion.
The following night she seemed more impatient still; and on the third from recovering my company she complained of a headache, and left me.
Linton who had been conveyed up to the little parlour soon after I left, was terrified into fetching the key before his father re-ascended.
keeping my nerves at such a stretch that, if they had not resembled catgut, they would long ago have relaxed to the feebleness of Linton’s.
When this slight disagreement was over, they were friends again, and as busy as possible in their several occupations of pupil and teacher.
It appeared to me, not Mr. Heathcliff, but a goblin; and, in my terror, I let the candle bend towards the wall, and it left me in darkness.
I shall return to Brocklehurst Hall in the course of a week or two: my good friend, the Archdeacon, will not permit me to leave him sooner.
The moon was set, and it was very dark; Bessie carried a lantern, whose light glanced on wet steps and gravel road sodden by a recent thaw.
I suspected she might be right and I wrong; but I would not ponder the matter deeply; like Felix, I put it off to a more convenient season.
“Come, eat something,” she said; but I put both away from me, feeling as if a drop or a crumb would have choked me in my present condition.
Have I not described a pleasant site for a dwelling, when I speak of it as bosomed in hill and wood, and rising from the verge of a stream?
A great many gentlemen and ladies came to see mama, and I used to dance before them, or to sit on their knees and sing to them: I liked it.
“Now,” said he, releasing his under lip from a hard bite, “just hand me my whip; it lies there under the hedge.”

I sought it and found it.
Though it was now dark, I knew he was awake; because I heard him fulminating strange anathemas at finding himself lying in a pool of water.
She said “Good morning, Miss,” in her usual phlegmatic and brief manner; and taking up another ring and more tape, went on with her sewing.
While Mr. Rochester and the other gentlemen directed these alterations, the ladies were running up and down stairs ringing for their maids.
This was the point—this was where the nerve was touched and teased—this was where the fever was sustained and fed: she could not charm him.
“Jane, Jane,” said he, stopping before me, “you are quite pale with your vigils: don’t you curse me for disturbing your rest?”

“Curse you?
There are ten; is it not plenty?”

“Yes, sir, but now you owe me five.”

“Come back for it, then; I am your banker for forty pounds.”

“Mr.
In his last illness, he had it brought continually to his bedside; and but an hour before he died, he bound me by vow to keep the creature.
It was now the sweetest hour of the twenty-four:—“Day its fervid fires had wasted,” and dew fell cool on panting plain and scorched summit.
You, sir, have placed it before me.”

“In what shape?”

“In the shape of Miss Ingram; a noble and beautiful woman,—your bride.”

“My bride!
“I am sorry to grieve you,” pursued the widow; “but you are so young, and so little acquainted with men, I wished to put you on your guard.
I was no vocalist myself, and, in his fastidious judgment, no musician, either; but I delighted in listening when the performance was good.
He saw me; for the moon had opened a blue field in the sky, and rode in it watery bright: he took his hat off, and waved it round his head.
“It cannot be too early to commence the task I have to fulfil,” thought I. I rose: I was dressed; for I had taken off nothing but my shoes.
He was fond and proud of me—it is what no man besides will ever be.—But where am I wandering, and what am I saying, and above all, feeling?
They left a daughter, which, at its very birth, Charity received in her lap—cold as that of the snow-drift I almost stuck fast in to-night.
Is it not, by its noble cares and sublime results, the one best calculated to fill the void left by uptorn affections and demolished hopes?
No doubt he had invoked the help of the Holy Spirit to subdue the anger I had roused in him, and now believed he had forgiven me once more.
It was the same vehicle whence, a year ago, I had alighted one summer evening on this very spot—how desolate, and hopeless, and objectless!
As he came down the great staircase at last, after Mrs. Rochester had flung herself from the battlements, there was a great crash—all fell.
To this house I came just ere dark on an evening marked by the characteristics of sad sky, cold gale, and continued small penetrating rain.
I find you lonely: I will be your companion—to read to you, to walk with you, to sit with you, to wait on you, to be eyes and hands to you.
If a moment’s silence broke the conversation, he would turn restless, touch me, then say, “Jane.”

“You are altogether a human being, Jane?
I sought a seat for him in a hidden and lovely spot, a dry stump of a tree; nor did I refuse to let him, when seated, place me on his knee.
Never did I weary of reading to him; never did I weary of conducting him where he wished to go: of doing for him what he wished to be done.
The business of eating being concluded, and no one uttering a word of sociable conversation, I approached a window to examine the weather.
“You are incurable, Heathcliff; and Mr. Hindley will have to proceed to extremities, see if he won’t.” My words came truer than I desired.
But the poor dame had reason to repent of her kindness: she and her husband both took the fever, and died within a few days of each other.
But I soon found her delirious strength much surpassed mine (she was delirious, I became convinced by her subsequent actions and ravings).
I’ll not lie there by myself: they may bury me twelve feet deep, and throw the church down over me, but I won’t rest till you are with me.
I was not aware how openly I grieved, till Earnshaw halted opposite, in his measured walk, and gave me a stare of newly-awakened surprise.
Joseph was bending over the fire, peering into a large pan that swung above it; and a wooden bowl of oatmeal stood on the settle close by.
Before you leave this house, I must exact a promise from you that you’ll get me an interview with her: consent, or refuse, I will see her!
Well might Catherine deem that heaven would be a land of exile to her, unless with her mortal body she cast away her moral character also.
He did not omit to avail himself of the opportunity, cautiously and briefly; too cautiously to betray his presence by the slightest noise.
‘If I can get my arm out I can hit him!’

“I’m afraid, Ellen, you’ll set me down as really wicked; but you don’t know all, so don’t judge.
The lattice was open, and, as he stepped out, I heard Cathy inquiring of her unsociable attendant what was that inscription over the door?
‘If I can only get this off,’ I muttered, ‘I wish they may shovel in the earth over us both!’ and I wrenched at it more desperately still.
His attention became, by degrees, quite centred in the study of her thick silky curls: her face he couldn’t see, and she couldn’t see him.
Those books, both prose and verse, are consecrated to me by other associations; and I hate to have them debased and profaned in his mouth!
“I shall not know that till it comes,” he said; “I’m only half conscious of it now.”

“You have no feeling of illness, have you?” I asked.
There is—I repeat it—a difference; and it is a good, and not a bad action to mark broadly and clearly the line of separation between them.
“Jane, I don’t like cavillers or questioners; besides, there is something truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in that manner.
“Who could want me?” I asked inwardly, as with both hands I turned the stiff door-handle, which, for a second or two, resisted my efforts.
Monsieur a parlé de vous: il m’a demandé le nom de ma gouvernante, et si elle n’était pas une petite personne, assez mince et un peu pâle.
I did not wonder, when, without looking at me, he took a seat at the other side of the room, and began conversing with some of the ladies.
She was not good; she was not original: she used to repeat sounding phrases from books: she never offered, nor had, an opinion of her own.
Mason, supported by Mr. Rochester and the surgeon, seemed to walk with tolerable ease: they assisted him into the chaise; Carter followed.
I see the necessity of departure; and it is like looking on the necessity of death.”

“Where do you see the necessity?” he asked suddenly.
But what had you to ask, thing,—out with it?”

“There, you are less than civil now; and I like rudeness a great deal better than flattery.
“No, no—let us be gone,” was the anxious reply; and without waiting to take leave of Mr. Rochester, they made their exit at the hall door.
I told you I would send Adèle to school; and what do I want with a child for a companion, and not my own child,—a French dancer’s bastard?
Do you understand?”

I shook my head: it required a degree of courage, excited as he was becoming, even to risk that mute sign of dissent.
Hope to meet again there.”

“Then you will not yield?”

“No.”

“Then you condemn me to live wretched and to die accursed?” His voice rose.
“Ye’ll want your supper, I am sure,” observed Hannah; “and so will Mr. St. John when he comes in.”

And she proceeded to prepare the meal.
They both tried to appear as usual; but the sorrow they had to struggle against was one that could not be entirely conquered or concealed.
I shall never more know the sweet homage given to beauty, youth, and grace—for never to any one else shall I seem to possess these charms.
I did not observe it closely.”

“You did, Mr. Rivers.”

He almost started at my sudden and strange abruptness: he looked at me astonished.
I must enjoy them now; don’t recall either my mind or body to the school; I am out of it and disposed for full holiday.”

He looked grave.
I heard one of your kind an hour ago, singing high over the wood: but its song had no music for me, any more than the rising sun had rays.
To be privileged to put my arms round what I value—to press my lips to what I love—to repose on what I trust: is that to make a sacrifice?
One stop brought us into the family sitting-room, without any introductory lobby or passage: they call it here “the house” pre-eminently.
The greatest punishment we could invent for her was to keep her separate from him: yet she got chided more than any of us on his account.
Joseph remained to hector over tenants and labourers; and because it was his vocation to be where he had plenty of wickedness to reprove.
It’s a kindness to let you have a glimpse of her genuine disposition.”

“Where are you going?” demanded Catherine, advancing to the door.
“You’ve made me afraid and ashamed of you,” he continued; “I’ll not come here again!”

Her eyes began to glisten and her lids to twinkle.
Let Mr. Linton alone about him, unless you would like an open quarrel between them.”

“But does it not show great weakness?” pursued she.
Tell her what Heathcliff is: an unreclaimed creature, without refinement, without cultivation; an arid wilderness of furze and whinstone.
If I imagined you really wished me to marry Isabel, I’d cut my throat!”

“Oh, the evil is that I am not jealous, is it?” cried Catherine.
It required a great deal of labour to satisfy the old man that Heathcliff was not the aggressor; especially with my hardly-wrung replies.
A propensity to be saucy was one; and a perverse will, that indulged children invariably acquire, whether they be good tempered or cross.
I walked as if for a wager, mile after mile, till a turn brought me in view of the Heights; but no Catherine could I detect, far or near.
Come, let us seek for Minny ourselves, and begone.”

“But, Ellen,” cried she, staring fixed in astonishment, “how dare he speak so to me?
Having no excuse for lingering longer, I slipped out, while Linton was engaged in timidly rebuffing the advances of a friendly sheep-dog.
And, hard though it be to crush her buoyant spirit, I must persevere in making her sad while I live, and leaving her solitary when I die.
If you doubt, encourage her to retract her word, and you’ll have an opportunity of judging!”

“I’ll not retract my word,” said Catherine.
But you’ll not talk of what I tell you; and my mind is so eternally secluded in itself, it is tempting at last to turn it out to another.
Be seated somewhere; and until you can speak pleasantly, remain silent.”

A breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room, I slipped in there.
Her beauty, her pink cheeks and golden curls, seemed to give delight to all who looked at her, and to purchase indemnity for every fault.
I have studied how best to mortify in them the worldly sentiment of pride; and, only the other day, I had a pleasing proof of my success.
Is it in any way different from other schools?”

“It is partly a charity-school: you and I, and all the rest of us, are charity-children.
Inquiry was made into the origin of the scourge, and by degrees various facts came out which excited public indignation in a high degree.
The present Mr. Rochester has not been very long in possession of the property; only about nine years.”

“Nine years is a tolerable time.
But I won’t allow that, seeing that it would never suit my case, as I have made an indifferent, not to say a bad, use of both advantages.
He got into debt and into jail: his mother helped him out twice, but as soon as he was free he returned to his old companions and habits.
Missis refused: her means have long been much reduced by his extravagance; so he went back again, and the next news was that he was dead.
I reached the lodge at Gateshead about five o’clock in the afternoon of the first of May: I stepped in there before going up to the hall.
“I grieve to leave Thornfield: I love Thornfield:—I love it, because I have lived in it a full and delightful life,—momentarily at least.
“I mean you to accompany me to Millcote this morning; and while you prepare for the drive, I will enlighten the old lady’s understanding.
Mr. Rochester flung me behind him: the lunatic sprang and grappled his throat viciously, and laid her teeth to his cheek: they struggled.
I had been struggling with tears for some time: I had taken great pains to repress them, because I knew he would not like to see me weep.
Conqueror I might be of the house; but the inmate would escape to heaven before I could call myself possessor of its clay dwelling-place.
But it will be very dreadful, with this feeling of hunger, faintness, chill, and this sense of desolation—this total prostration of hope.
Because I know, or believe, Mr. Rochester is living: and then, to die of want and cold is a fate to which nature cannot submit passively.
In her animal spirits there was an affluence of life and certainty of flow, such as excited my wonder, while it baffled my comprehension.
Before I explain, recall, if you please, my notice, clearly given, that if I helped you, it must be as the blind man would help the lame.
Yes; I feel now that I was right when I adhered to principle and law, and scorned and crushed the insane promptings of a frenzied moment.
Besides, he could not bind all that he had in his nature—the rover, the aspirant, the poet, the priest—in the limits of a single passion.
I had lit their candles to go upstairs, but Diana had first to give hospitable orders respecting the driver; this done, both followed me.
Go up to that man, and inquire if Mr. Rochester be at home.”

The suggestion was sensible, and yet I could not force myself to act on it.
“I conscientiously believe so, Mr. Rochester.”

“Yet how, on this dark and doleful evening, could you so suddenly rise on my lone hearth?
A sorrowful sight I saw: dark night coming down prematurely, and sky and hills mingled in one bitter whirl of wind and suffocating snow.
Her spirits were always at high-water mark, her tongue always going—singing, laughing, and plaguing everybody who would not do the same.
It is an hour past dinnertime: I thought you were gone.”

“Hindley does not often free us from his accursed presence,” observed the boy.
“You think I speak from wicked selfishness?”

“I’m certain you do,” retorted Isabella; “and I shudder at you!”

“Good!” cried the other.
Besides, he might come and begin a string of abuse or complainings; I’m certain I should recriminate, and God knows where we should end!
“I knew Mrs. Linton’s nature to be headstrong and domineering,” cried I: “but I didn’t know that you wished to foster her fierce temper!
I have now heard all my neighbour’s history, at different sittings, as the housekeeper could spare time from more important occupations.
Do!”

Heathcliff went to the back of her chair, and leant over, but not so far as to let her see his face, which was livid with emotion.
To be sure, one might have doubted, after the wayward and impatient existence she had led, whether she merited a haven of peace at last.
Catherine told Hareton who she was, and where she was going; and asked him to show her the way: finally, beguiling him to accompany her.
but that’s worse than I expected—and the devil knows I was not sanguine!”

I bid the trembling and bewildered child get down, and enter.
“Tut, tut!” said Heathcliff, stretching out a hand and dragging him roughly between his knees, and then holding up his head by the chin.
He laughed; Hareton darkened: I perceived he was very sensitive to suspected slights, and had obviously a dim notion of his inferiority.
I descended to tell my master that the young lady’s qualm of sickness was almost gone, but I judged it best for her to lie down a while.
There’s a little flower up yonder, the last bud from the multitude of bluebells that clouded those turf steps in July with a lilac mist.
Don’t be in haste to enter, for I have an explanation to ask and obtain.”

“I sha’n’t speak to you, Mr. Heathcliff,” answered Catherine.
I gave Michael books and pictures to prepare Minny every evening, and to put her back in the stable: you mustn’t scold him either, mind.
Then, while the master and Earnshaw were at breakfast, she entered the house, and asked all in a quiver if the doctor might be sent for?
But his self-love would endure no further torment: I heard, and not altogether disapprovingly, a manual check given to her saucy tongue.
I would go out for a walk; and, meantime she must try to prepare a corner of a sitting-room for me to sup in, and a bedroom to sleep in.
master!” I cried, “don’t, for God’s sake, stare as if you saw an unearthly vision.”

“Don’t, for God’s sake, shout so loud,” he replied.
Shaking my hair from my eyes, I lifted my head and tried to look boldly round the dark room; at this moment a light gleamed on the wall.
I could not eat the tart; and the plumage of the bird, the tints of the flowers, seemed strangely faded: I put both plate and tart away.
Besides, school would be a complete change: it implied a long journey, an entire separation from Gateshead, an entrance into a new life.
The order was now given “To the garden!” Each put on a coarse straw bonnet, with strings of coloured calico, and a cloak of grey frieze.
of which, however, I, to my dismay (for I was beginning to be hungry) discerned only a very small portion: Miss Temple discerned it too.
I traced the white road winding round the base of one mountain, and vanishing in a gorge between two; how I longed to follow it farther!
Mrs. Fairfax turned out to be what she appeared, a placid-tempered, kind-natured woman, of competent education and average intelligence.
I caressed him, and he wagged his great tail; but he looked an eerie creature to be alone with, and I could not tell whence he had come.
I must, then, repeat continually that we are for ever sundered:—and yet, while I breathe and think, I must love him.”

Coffee is handed.
I have seen a gipsy vagabond; she has practised in hackneyed fashion the science of palmistry and told me what such people usually tell.
Well, perhaps I have: to speak truth, I have an acquaintance with one of them, Mrs. Poole—”

I started to my feet when I heard the name.
No: stillness returned: each murmur and movement ceased gradually, and in about an hour Thornfield Hall was again as hushed as a desert.
How are you, dear aunt?”

I had once vowed that I would never call her aunt again: I thought it no sin to forget and break that vow now.
Reed pitied it; and he used to nurse it and notice it as if it had been his own: more, indeed, than he ever noticed his own at that age.
It is as well I should ease my mind before I die: what we think little of in health, burdens us at such an hour as the present is to me.
There is some difference between living with such an one as you and with Georgiana: you perform your own part in life and burden no one.
“It is, to be sure; and when you get to Bitternutt Lodge, Connaught, Ireland, I shall never see you again, Jane: that’s morally certain.
By dint of entreaties expressed in energetic whispers, I reduced the half-dozen to two: these however, he vowed he would select himself.
Hearing a cautious step behind me, I glanced over my shoulder: one of the strangers—a gentleman, evidently—was advancing up the chancel.
for I am very hungry.” He cast on me a glance of surprise; but without answering, he cut a thick slice from his loaf, and gave it to me.
They are, in truth, scanty enough; but—” I interrupted—

“My cottage is clean and weather-proof; my furniture sufficient and commodious.
Oh, my poor master—once almost my husband—whom I had often called “my dear Edward!”

“He must have been a bad man,” observed Mr. Rivers.
I need not narrate in detail the further struggles I had, and arguments I used, to get matters regarding the legacy settled as I wished.
You shall be mine: I claim you—not for my pleasure, but for my Sovereign’s service.”

“I am not fit for it: I have no vocation,” I said.
God did not give me my life to throw away; and to do as you wish me would, I begin to think, be almost equivalent to committing suicide.
I stared—she stared also: at any rate, she kept her eyes on me in a cool, regardless manner, exceedingly embarrassing and disagreeable.
“Unhappy in your conjectures, sir,” observed my host; “we neither of us have the privilege of owning your good fairy; her mate is dead.
He was not far; I found him smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony in the stable, and feeding the other beasts, according to custom.
I guess his return will make a jubilee to her.”

Mr. Linton walked to a window on the other side of the room that overlooked the court.
I saw him smile to himself—grin rather—and lapse into ominous musing whenever Mrs. Linton had occasion to be absent from the apartment.
The latter’s distraction at his bereavement is a subject too painful to be dwelt on; its after-effects showed how deep the sorrow sunk.
The servants thought me gone to shake off the drowsiness of my protracted watch; in reality, my chief motive was seeing Mr. Heathcliff.
We were left at peace in our beds as long as the summer moon shone, but the moment a blast of winter returns, you must run for shelter!
That is the sole consideration which can make me endure the whelp: I despise him for himself, and hate him for the memories he revives!
“He calls him a sneaking fool.”

“Yours is a wicked man,” retorted Catherine; “and you are very naughty to dare to repeat what he says.
As soon as I entered I hastened to change my soaked shoes and stockings; but sitting such a while at the Heights had done the mischief.
You’re too young to rest always contented, living by yourself; and I some way fancy no one could see Catherine Linton and not love her.
He’s asleep, and papa will be wanting us back.”

“Well, we must not leave him asleep,” I answered; “wait till he wakes, and be patient.
We tried the kitchen door, but that was fastened outside: we looked at the windows—they were too narrow for even Cathy’s little figure.
she has disturbed me, night and day, through eighteen years—incessantly—remorselessly—till yesternight; and yesternight I was tranquil.
In winter nothing more dreary, in summer nothing more divine, than those glens shut in by hills, and those bluff, bold swells of heath.
“Nothing, indeed,” thought I, as I struggled to repress a sob, and hastily wiped away some tears, the impotent evidences of my anguish.
The spoons were moved slowly: I saw each girl taste her food and try to swallow it; but in most cases the effort was soon relinquished.
“Is Miss Temple as severe to you as Miss Scatcherd?”

At the utterance of Miss Temple’s name, a soft smile flitted over her grave face.
I generally contrived to reserve a moiety of this bounteous repast for myself; but the remainder I was invariably obliged to part with.
They ought to have come a little sooner to have heard his lecture on dress, for they were splendidly attired in velvet, silk, and furs.
I experienced a shock of horror, then a strong thrill of grief, then a desire—a necessity to see her; and I asked in what room she lay.
“Ah!” cried she, in French, “you speak my language as well as Mr. Rochester does: I can talk to you as I can to him, and so can Sophie.
How very serious—how very solemn you look: and you are as ignorant of the matter as this cameo head” (taking one from the mantelpiece).
All sad feelings seemed now driven from the house, all gloomy associations forgotten: there was life everywhere, movement all day long.
He and his aids now withdrew behind the curtain: the other party, which was headed by Colonel Dent, sat down on the crescent of chairs.
She advocated a high tone of sentiment; but she did not know the sensations of sympathy and pity; tenderness and truth were not in her.
She seemed the emblem of my past life; and he, I was now to array myself to meet, the dread, but adored, type of my unknown future day.
I know you—I am on my guard.”

“Sir, I do not wish to act against you,” I said; and my unsteady voice warned me to curtail my sentence.
My father and my brother Rowland knew all this; but they thought only of the thirty thousand pounds, and joined in the plot against me.
I got some water, I got some bread: for perhaps I should have to walk far; and my strength, sorely shaken of late, must not break down.
Ere long, with the servant’s aid, I contrived to mount a staircase; my dripping clothes were removed; soon a warm, dry bed received me.
I devoured the books they lent me: then it was full satisfaction to discuss with them in the evening what I had perused during the day.
Entering a portal, fastened only by a latch, I stood amidst a space of enclosed ground, from which the wood swept away in a semicircle.
Besides, I wished to touch no deep-thrilling chord—to open no fresh well of emotion in his heart: my sole present aim was to cheer him.
I found the rules of the establishment were too strict, its course of study too severe for a child of her age: I took her home with me.
He had his private manner of interpreting the phrase, and it seemed necessary the brother should sin different sins on every occasion.
I joined my wail to theirs, loud and bitter; but Joseph asked what we could be thinking of to roar in that way over a saint in heaven.
He stubbornly declined answering for a while: she persevered, and finally persuaded him to hold communion with her through the boards.
“It is for God to punish wicked people; we should learn to forgive.”

“No, God won’t have the satisfaction that I shall,” he returned.
The curate dropped calling, and nobody decent came near us, at last; unless Edgar Linton’s visits to Miss Cathy might be an exception.
My master’s surprise equalled or exceeded mine: he remained for a minute at a loss how to address the ploughboy, as he had called him.
Tell Isabella to shun me; this uproar is owing to her; and should she or any one else aggravate my anger at present, I shall get wild.
I remember being in the parlour after they had quarrelled, and Edgar being cruelly provoking, and me running into this room desperate.
I wish you had sincerity enough to tell me whether Catherine would suffer greatly from his loss: the fear that she would restrains me.
Now, was it not the depth of absurdity—of genuine idiocy, for that pitiful, slavish, mean-minded brach to dream that I could love her?
She proceeded:

Retracing the course of Catherine Linton, I fear we have no right to think she is; but we’ll leave her with her Maker.
“Be more charitable: there are worse men than he is yet!”

“He’s not a human being,” she retorted; “and he has no claim on my charity.
Fortunately, curiosity and a quick intellect made her an apt scholar: she learned rapidly and eagerly, and did honour to his teaching.
It shows you are a cunning little fox, and nobody will put faith in you any more.”

“What have I done?” sobbed she, instantly checked.
You must try to love him, as you did your mother, and then he will love you.”

“But why have I not heard of him before?” asked Linton.
We parted that night—hostile; but next day beheld me on the road to Wuthering Heights, by the side of my wilful young mistress’s pony.
Papa said you would call,” continued he, after recovering a little from Catherine’s embrace; while she stood by looking very contrite.
I heard a malignant, crackly laugh by the fire, and turning, beheld that odious Joseph standing rubbing his bony hands, and quivering.
We have done nothing to deserve this separation; and you are not angry with me: you have no reason to dislike me, you allow, yourself.
But I’m hardly going to come to give Mr. Heathcliff pleasure; whatever reason he may have for ordering Linton to undergo this penance.
In her absence I began to beg for Zillah’s place at the Heights, offering to resign mine to her; but he would suffer it on no account.
Besides, unless I had received a distinct impression of her passionless features, that strange feeling would hardly have been removed.
Being alone, and conscious two yards of loose earth was the sole barrier between us, I said to myself—‘I’ll have her in my arms again!
Young folks are always the better for an elder’s over-looking; and Hareton, with all his bashfulness, isn’t a model of nice behaviour.
“I want you to come here;” and seating himself in an arm-chair, he intimated by a gesture that I was to approach and stand before him.
“Miss Abbot, lend me your garters; she would break mine directly.”

Miss Abbot turned to divest a stout leg of the necessary ligature.
I know that had I been a sanguine, brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child—though equally dependent and friendless—Mrs.
In such vault I had been told did Mr. Reed lie buried; and led by this thought to recall his idea, I dwelt on it with gathering dread.
It puzzles me now to remember with what absurd sincerity I doated on this little toy, half fancying it alive and capable of sensation.
The remedy was, to thrust them forward into the centre of the schoolroom, and oblige them to stand there till the sermon was finished.
Brocklehurst is not a god: nor is he even a great and admired man: he is little liked here; he never took steps to make himself liked.
“I am willing to amuse you, if I can, sir—quite willing; but I cannot introduce a topic, because how do I know what will interest you?
Silence composes the nerves; and as an unbroken hush now reigned again through the whole house, I began to feel the return of slumber.
She seemed to examine me warily; then she answered—

“The servants sleep so far off, you know, Miss, they would not be likely to hear.
It looked a lovely face enough, and when compared with the real head in chalk, the contrast was as great as self-control could desire.
“Poor, puny things, not fit to stir a step beyond papa’s park gates: nor to go even so far without mama’s permission and guardianship!
She had on a red cloak and a black bonnet: or rather, a broad-brimmed gipsy hat, tied down with a striped handkerchief under her chin.
When dressed, I sat a long time by the window looking out over the silent grounds and silvered fields and waiting for I knew not what.
He made some sort of arrangement without speaking, though I heard a low voice address him: he came out and closed the door behind him.
He took the sponge, dipped it in, and moistened the corpse-like face; he asked for my smelling-bottle, and applied it to the nostrils.
I renewed the fuel, re-arranged the bedclothes, gazed awhile on her who could not now gaze on me, and then I moved away to the window.
You will stipulate, I see, for peculiar terms—what will they be?”

“I only want an easy mind, sir; not crushed by crowded obligations.
I had no intention of dying with him—he might depend on that.”

“Oh, all he longed, all he prayed for, was that I might live with him!
I had risen up in bed, I bent forward: first surprise, then bewilderment, came over me; and then my blood crept cold through my veins.
Consider that eye: consider the resolute, wild, free thing looking out of it, defying me, with more than courage—with a stern triumph.
I had one morsel of bread yet: the remnant of a roll I had bought in a town we passed through at noon with a stray penny—my last coin.
‘Ich wäge die Gedanken in der Schale meines Zornes und die Werke mit dem Gewichte meines Grimms.’ I like it!”

Both were again silent.
Come to the sofa and sit down now, Miss Elliott.”

I gave an involuntary half start at hearing the alias: I had forgotten my new name.
“Do you think you shall like Morton?” she asked of me, with a direct and naïve simplicity of tone and manner, pleasing, if child-like.
The event of the conflict is decisive: my way is now clear; I thank God for it!” So saying, he returned to his papers and his silence.
You are not really shocked: for, with your superior mind, you cannot be either so dull or so conceited as to misunderstand my meaning.
I was tempted to cease struggling with him—to rush down the torrent of his will into the gulf of his existence, and there lose my own.
“Yes, of friends,” I answered rather hesitatingly: for I knew I meant more than friends, but could not tell what other word to employ.
By this curious turn of disposition I have gained the reputation of deliberate heartlessness; how undeserved, I alone can appreciate.
He stepped forward, and called him by name, and touched his shoulder; but he would not move: so he took the candle and looked at him.
It used to hang on one side, and his wife’s on the other; but hers has been removed, or else you might see something of what she was.
CHAPTER IX
He entered, vociferating oaths dreadful to hear; and caught me in the act of stowing his son away in the kitchen cupboard.
She grew cross and wearisome; snapping at and teasing Catherine continually, at the imminent risk of exhausting her limited patience.
I fancied it could not be very prejudicial to Mrs. Linton; unless she made it so afterwards, by assuming the defensive for her guest.
Well, if I cannot keep Heathcliff for my friend—if Edgar will be mean and jealous, I’ll try to break their hearts by breaking my own.
I pondered, and worried myself to discover what it could be, and, most strangely, the whole last seven years of my life grew a blank!
I was a child; my father was just buried, and my misery arose from the separation that Hindley had ordered between me and Heathcliff.
At present he’s discharged from the trouble of calling; owing to some presumptuous aspirations after Miss Linton which he manifested.
“I shall not refuse to go out of doors,” he answered; “but I shall stay in the garden: and, Nelly, mind you keep your word to-morrow.
No, indeed, indeed, I wouldn’t!” And here Isabella began to cry; but, immediately dashing the water from her lashes, she recommenced.
The end of Earnshaw was what might have been expected; it followed fast on his sister’s: there were scarcely six months between them.
I observed once, indeed, something like exultation in his aspect: it was just when the people were bearing the coffin from the house.
He descended, nearly as eager as herself; and a considerable interval elapsed ere they had a thought to spare for any but themselves.
It is probable Mr. Heathcliff proposed going from summer to summer, but never found a convenient opportunity; and now it is too late.
You are my son, then, I’ll tell you; and your mother was a wicked slut to leave you in ignorance of the sort of father you possessed.
“Very well—and I will have some to exhibit to papa!” I answered, shaking back the rest into the bundle, and turning anew to the door.
She soon heard me: she was milking the cows in a shed behind the barn, and hurrying from her work, she inquired what there was to do?
And perhaps you will consent—and he’ll let me die with you!”

My young lady, on witnessing his intense anguish, stooped to raise him.
The window, however, was narrow, like those below, and the garret trap was safe from our attempts; for we were fastened in as before.
His gun burst while out on the hills by himself; a splinter cut his arm, and he lost a good deal of blood before he could reach home.
In every cloud, in every tree—filling the air at night, and caught by glimpses in every object by day—I am surrounded with her image!
“I don’t think it right to wander out of doors,” I observed, “instead of being in bed: it is not wise, at any rate this moist season.
Yet, I thought, I ought to have been happy, for none of the Reeds were there, they were all gone out in the carriage with their mama.
She looks as if she were thinking of something beyond her punishment—beyond her situation: of something not round her nor before her.
A new place, in a new house, amongst new faces, under new circumstances: I want this because it is of no use wanting anything better.
The next day she laid the affair before Mr. Brocklehurst, who said that Mrs. Reed must be written to, as she was my natural guardian.
Throwing these into distance, rose, in the foreground, a head,—a colossal head, inclined towards the iceberg, and resting against it.
He had almost as much as declared his conviction of her criminality last night: what mysterious cause withheld him from accusing her?
Ere long, I had reason to congratulate myself on the course of wholesome discipline to which I had thus forced my feelings to submit.
The divining party again laid their heads together: apparently they could not agree about the word or syllable the scene illustrated.
He must love such a handsome, noble, witty, accomplished lady; and probably she loves him, or, if not his person, at least his purse.
You are my little friend, are you not?”

“I like to serve you, sir, and to obey you in all that is right.”

“Precisely: I see you do.
I step aside into the ivy recess; he will not stay long: he will soon return whence he came, and if I sit still he will never see me.
and there is no more beating of rain against the window-panes: look here” (he lifted up the curtain)—“it is a lovely night!”

It was.
In a room without a window, there burnt a fire guarded by a high and strong fender, and a lamp suspended from the ceiling by a chain.
On the first of these occasions, she perpetrated the attempt to burn me in my bed; on the second, she paid that ghastly visit to you.
It was a barbed arrow-head in my breast; it tore me when I tried to extract it; it sickened me when remembrance thrust it farther in.
I asked for what sum he would take me there; he said thirty shillings; I answered I had but twenty; well, he would try to make it do.
Young woman, rise, and pass before me into the house.”

Hush, Hannah; I have a word to say to the woman
With difficulty I obeyed him.
“Not too much at first—restrain her,” said the brother; “she has had enough.” And he withdrew the cup of milk and the plate of bread.
To that bed I seemed to have grown; I lay on it motionless as a stone; and to have torn me from it would have been almost to kill me.
And I do not want a stranger—unsympathising, alien, different from me; I want my kindred: those with whom I have full fellow-feeling.
I should still have my unblighted self to turn to: my natural unenslaved feelings with which to communicate in moments of loneliness.
I—who, though I had no love, had much friendship for him—was hurt by the marked omission: so much hurt that tears started to my eyes.
You adhere to that resolution?”

Reader, do you know, as I do, what terror those cold people can put into the ice of their questions?
“He is a good and a great man; but he forgets, pitilessly, the feelings and claims of little people, in pursuing his own large views.
No wonder that letters addressed to people here had never received an answer: as well despatch epistles to a vault in a church aisle.
There were no flowers, no garden-beds; only a broad gravel-walk girdling a grass-plat, and this set in the heavy frame of the forest.
“Will you take my arm, sir?” he said; “there is a heavy shower coming on: had you not better go in?”

“Let me alone,” was the answer.
I seized the handle to essay another trial; when a young man without coat, and shouldering a pitchfork, appeared in the yard behind.
He delighted to witness Hindley degrading himself past redemption; and became daily more notable for savage sullenness and ferocity.
It expressed, plainer than words could do, the intensest anguish at having made himself the instrument of thwarting his own revenge.
See if I don’t ferret him out!”

I departed to renew my search; its result was disappointment, and Joseph’s quest ended in the same.
The haggardness of Mrs. Linton’s appearance smote him speechless, and he could only glance from her to me in horrified astonishment.
Her pretty face was wan and listless; her hair uncurled: some locks hanging lankly down, and some carelessly twisted round her head.
We are all done for—master, mistress, and servant.”

I wrung my hands, and cried out; and Mr. Linton hastened his step at the noise.
I shall leave you, unless you be quick; so please yourself.”

“The pony is in the yard,” she replied, “and Phoenix is shut in there.
My little mistress behaved like an angel in coming to wait on me, and cheer my solitude; the confinement brought me exceedingly low.
“Where is Miss Catherine?” I demanded sternly, supposing I could frighten him into giving intelligence, by catching him thus, alone.
On Easter Monday, Joseph went to Gimmerton fair with some cattle; and, in the afternoon, I was busy getting up linen in the kitchen.
Having considered me at leisure, he said—

“What made you ill yesterday?”

“She had a fall,” said Bessie, again putting in her word.
First, I smiled to myself and felt elate; but this fierce pleasure subsided in me as fast as did the accelerated throb of my pulses.
I suppose I have a considerable organ of veneration, for I retain yet the sense of admiring awe with which my eyes traced her steps.
When full of flowers they would doubtless look pretty; but now, at the latter end of January, all was wintry blight and brown decay.
I read these words over and over again: I felt that an explanation belonged to them, and was unable fully to penetrate their import.
Just then it seemed my chamber-door was touched; as if fingers had swept the panels in groping a way along the dark gallery outside.
If you are not warm enough, you may take my cloak yonder; wrap it about you, and sit down in the arm-chair: there,—I will put it on.
Did no one hear him move?”

She again raised her eyes to me, and this time there was something of consciousness in their expression.
I told her something on that point about an hour ago which made her look wondrous grave: the corners of her mouth fell half an inch.
I sought Mr. Mason, delivered the message, and preceded him from the room: I ushered him into the library, and then I went upstairs.
The night—its silence—its rest, was rent in twain by a savage, a sharp, a shrilly sound that ran from end to end of Thornfield Hall.
This door was open; a light shone out of the room within: I heard thence a snarling, snatching sound, almost like a dog quarrelling.
Mr. Rochester opened the shirt of the wounded man, whose arm and shoulder were bandaged: he sponged away blood, trickling fast down.
To live, for me, Jane, is to stand on a crater-crust which may crack and spue fire any day.”

“But Mr. Mason seems a man easily led.
Two young ladies appeared before me; one very tall, almost as tall as Miss Ingram—very thin too, with a sallow face and severe mien.
Come, we will sit there in peace to-night, though we should never more be destined to sit there together.” He seated me and himself.
I have not been buried with inferior minds, and excluded from every glimpse of communion with what is bright and energetic and high.
“Do you doubt me, Jane?”

“Entirely.”

“You have no faith in me?”

“Not a whit.”

“Am I a liar in your eyes?” he asked passionately.
This morning I wrote to my banker in London to send me certain jewels he has in his keeping,—heirlooms for the ladies of Thornfield.
You consider my arms filled and my embraces appropriated?”

“At any rate, there is neither room nor claim for me, sir.”

“Why, Jane?
My father said nothing about her money; but he told me Miss Mason was the boast of Spanish Town for her beauty: and this was no lie.
The first was a page so heavenly sweet—so deadly sad—that to read one line of it would dissolve my courage and break down my energy.
A little before dark I passed a farm-house, at the open door of which the farmer was sitting, eating his supper of bread and cheese.
Not only the anchor of hope, but the footing of fortitude was gone—at least for a moment; but the last I soon endeavoured to regain.
So I think at this hour, when I look back to the crisis through the quiet medium of time: I was unconscious of folly at the instant.
I recalled the voice I had heard; again I questioned whence it came, as vainly as before: it seemed in me—not in the external world.
No one saw her: they only knew by rumour that such a person was at the Hall; and who or what she was it was difficult to conjecture.
Go and ask if she wants anything; and when she will come down.”

I came down as soon as I thought there was a prospect of breakfast.
You know I was proud of my strength: but what is it now, when I must give it over to foreign guidance, as a child does its weakness?
By her grateful attention to me and mine, she has long since well repaid any little kindness I ever had it in my power to offer her.
Go round by th’ end o’ t’ laith, if ye went to spake to him.”

“Is there nobody inside to open the door?” I hallooed, responsively.
We ran from the top of the Heights to the park, without stopping—Catherine completely beaten in the race, because she was barefoot.
to quarrel who should hold a heap of warm hair, and each begin to cry because both, after struggling to get it, refused to take it.
“The Lintons heard us, and with one accord they shot like arrows to the door; there was silence, and then a cry, ‘Oh, mamma, mamma!
She did bring herself, finally, to confess, and to confide in me: there was not a soul else that she might fashion into an adviser.
Have mercy on this unfortunate boy, if you care nothing for yourself!”

“Any one will do better for him than I shall,” he answered.
Nelly, I see now you think me a selfish wretch; but did it never strike you that if Heathcliff and I married, we should be beggars?
Do let me feel it—it comes straight down the moor—do let me have one breath!” To pacify her I held the casement ajar a few seconds.
“Oh, sir!” I cried, checking the exclamation risen to his lips at the sight which met him, and the bleak atmosphere of the chamber.
“You shall account more clearly for keeping me ignorant of this!” And he took his wife in his arms, and looked at her with anguish.
It will be ten times blacker with that guest than ever it was before!”

You’ve acquainted me, Ellen, with your old master’s habits.
If she desired to go, she might: the nuisance of her presence outweighs the gratification to be derived from tormenting her!”

“Mr.
I’d rather sit with Hindley, and hear his awful talk, than with ‘t’ little maister’ and his staunch supporter, that odious old man!
Mr. Heathcliff said he did not perceive that I was wanted; but I might stay and order the arrangements for the funeral, if I chose.
Her family were of a delicate constitution: she and Edgar both lacked the ruddy health that you will generally meet in these parts.
But there’s this difference; one is gold put to the use of paving-stones, and the other is tin polished to ape a service of silver.
“Oh, put them in the fire, do, do!”

But when I proceeded to open a place with the poker the sacrifice was too painful to be borne.
I doubt whether I am not altogether as worthless as he calls me, frequently; and then I feel so cross and bitter, I hate everybody!
He cursed you, I dare say, for coming into the world (I did, at least); and it would just do if he cursed you as he went out of it.
I met him on the road and asked.”

Instead of sitting down, I snatched my outdoor things, and hastened below, for the way was free.
I wish to be troubled by nobody: I wish to have this place to myself.”

“Is there some new reason for this banishment?” I inquired.
With a sweep of his hand he cleared a vacant space in front among the breakfast things, and leant forward to gaze more at his ease.
I leaned against a gate, and looked into an empty field where no sheep were feeding, where the short grass was nipped and blanched.
Miss Miller was now the only teacher in the room: a group of great girls standing about her spoke with serious and sullen gestures.
Continue to act as a good girl, and you will satisfy us.”

“Shall I, Miss Temple?”

“You will,” said she, passing her arm round me.
Spring drew on: she was indeed already come; the frosts of winter had ceased; its snows were melted, its cutting winds ameliorated.
On Thursday afternoons (half-holidays) we now took walks, and found still sweeter flowers opening by the wayside, under the hedges.
When he did come down, it was to attend to business: his agent and some of his tenants were arrived, and waiting to speak with him.
I knew my traveller with his broad and jetty eyebrows; his square forehead, made squarer by the horizontal sweep of his black hair.
It was not till after I had withdrawn to my own chamber for the night, that I steadily reviewed the tale Mr. Rochester had told me.
How people feel when they are returning home from an absence, long or short, I did not know: I had never experienced the sensation.
She comes from the other world—from the abode of people who are dead; and tells me so when she meets me alone here in the gloaming!
He checked himself in his exultation to demand, “But is there anything the matter, Janet, that you come to meet me at such an hour?
If I were a masterless and stray dog, I know that you would not turn me from your hearth to-night: as it is, I really have no fear.
I will say so much for you, though you have had the incivility to call me a beggar.”

She again regarded me with a surprised stare.
Mary would sit and watch me by the hour together: then she would take lessons; and a docile, intelligent, assiduous pupil she made.
By nine o’clock the next morning I was punctually opening the school; tranquil, settled, prepared for the steady duties of the day.
Is it not an odd tale?”

“Just tell me this,” said I, “and since you know so much, you surely can tell it me—what of Mr. Rochester?
“You were serious when I told you you had got a fortune; and now, for a matter of no moment, you are excited.”

“What can you mean?
That night, after he had kissed his sisters, he thought proper to forget even to shake hands with me, but left the room in silence.
Another field crossed—a lane threaded—and there were the courtyard walls—the back offices: the house itself, the rookery still hid.
No—I have touched you, heard you, felt the comfort of your presence—the sweetness of your consolation: I cannot give up these joys.
By chance, or else attracted by hearing his voice, it crept to Mr. Earnshaw’s door, and there he found it on quitting his chamber.
We crept through a broken hedge, groped our way up the path, and planted ourselves on a flower-plot under the drawing-room window.
Well, you must allow me to leap over some three years; during that space Mrs. Earnshaw—”

“No, no, I’ll allow nothing of the sort!
Yah knaw whet t’ Scripture ses.” And he began quoting several texts, referring us to chapters and verses where we might find them.
Heathcliff’s talk was outrageous, after you left us; but I could soon have diverted him from Isabella, and the rest meant nothing.
But no brutality disgusted her: I suppose she has an innate admiration of it, if only her precious person were secure from injury!
I reflected as the good woman descended to receive the doctor: and not exactly of the kind which I should have chosen to amuse me.
Gimmerton was an unsubstantial name in her ears; the chapel, the only building she had approached or entered, except her own home.
You will, perhaps, think the building old and dark at first; though it is a respectable house: the next best in the neighbourhood.
I couldn’t affirm that you are,” observed my young lady, wondering at his pertinacious assertion of what was evidently an untruth.
Quick, Ellen!”

And so we left him, scarcely conscious of our departure, so absorbed was he in anticipating his father’s approach.
Mr. Heathcliff, you’re a cruel man, but you’re not a fiend; and you won’t, from mere malice, destroy irrevocably all my happiness.
Who knows but he might take our part?”

“It was three servants sent to seek you from the Grange,” said Heathcliff, overhearing me.
“No, no,” he replied, coolly; “you’ll leave sufficient behind to cover your debts, if you fail to return: I’m not in such a hurry.
I was summoned to Wuthering Heights, within a fortnight of your leaving us, she said; and I obeyed joyfully, for Catherine’s sake.
she and I must have some talk;” and bending from the perpendicular, he installed his person in the arm-chair opposite Mrs. Reed’s.
There still remained an inch of candle: I now took out my letter; the seal was an initial F.; I broke it; the contents were brief.
It would be difficult to say: I could not then distinctly say it to myself; yet I had a reason, and a logical, natural reason too.
He snuffed round the prostrate group, and then he ran up to me; it was all he could do,—there was no other help at hand to summon.
I passed a tall briar, shooting leafy and flowery branches across the path; I see the narrow stile with stone steps; and I see—Mr.
What the deuce have you done with yourself this last month?”

“I have been with my aunt, sir, who is dead.”

“A true Janian reply!
I see you would ask why I keep such a woman in my house: when we have been married a year and a day, I will tell you; but not now.
The voice of Mrs. Fairfax, speaking to a servant in the hall, wakened you: and how curiously you smiled to and at yourself, Janet!
Ere many minutes had elapsed, I was again on my feet, however, and again searching something—a resource, or at least an informant.
Near the churchyard, and in the middle of a garden, stood a well-built though small house, which I had no doubt was the parsonage.
Yet he whom it describes scarcely impressed one with the idea of a gentle, a yielding, an impressible, or even of a placid nature.
I feel more inclination to put you in the way of keeping yourself, and shall endeavour to do so; but observe, my sphere is narrow.
Tremble lest in that case you should be numbered with those who have denied the faith, and are worse than infidels!”

He had done.
Daily He announces more distinctly,—‘Surely I come quickly!’ and hourly I more eagerly respond,—‘Amen; even so come, Lord Jesus!’”
I seemed to keep them closed above a quarter of an hour; yet, the instant I listened again, there was the doleful cry moaning on!
I’ve been a waif for twenty years!”

Thereat began a feeble scratching outside, and the pile of books moved as if thrust forward.
and here!” replied Catherine, striking one hand on her forehead, and the other on her breast: “in whichever place the soul lives.
“Joseph is here,” I answered, catching opportunely the roll of his cartwheels up the road; “and Heathcliff will come in with him.
“Here are two people sadly in need of a third to thaw the ice between them; and you are the very one we should both of us choose.
The lady had a cloak about her face; but having desired a sup of water, while she drank it fell back, and she saw her very plain.
He has just come home at dawn, and gone upstairs to his chamber; locking himself in—as if anybody dreamt of coveting his company!
His hair and clothes were whitened with snow, and his sharp cannibal teeth, revealed by cold and wrath, gleamed through the dark.
“What will become of her?” I ejaculated, pushing through a gap which the man was repairing, and making straight to the high-road.
He afterwards made Joseph remove the body to his chamber, and told me to return to mine, and Mrs. Heathcliff remained by herself.
He ought now to have been at school; but his mama had taken him home for a month or two, “on account of his delicate health.” Mr.
Thus was I severed from Bessie and Gateshead; thus whirled away to unknown, and, as I then deemed, remote and mysterious regions.
Shall I let you hear me sing now?”

She had finished her breakfast, so I permitted her to give a specimen of her accomplishments.
I saw Mr. Rochester smile:—his stern features softened; his eye grew both brilliant and gentle, its ray both searching and sweet.
“Now, Dent,” continued Mr. Rochester, “it is your turn.” And as the other party withdrew, he and his band took the vacated seats.
Oh, are you aware, Mr. Rochester, that a stranger has arrived here since you left this morning?”

“A stranger!—no; who can it be?
Amidst all this, I had to listen as well as watch: to listen for the movements of the wild beast or the fiend in yonder side den.
“That will do;—now wet the lip of the phial.”

I did so; he measured twelve drops of a crimson liquid, and presented it to Mason.
I gladly advanced; and it was not merely a cold word now, or even a shake of the hand that I received, but an embrace and a kiss.
I looked on my cherished wishes, yesterday so blooming and glowing; they lay stark, chill, livid corpses that could never revive.
Jane, you shall not stay here, nor will I. I was wrong ever to bring you to Thornfield Hall, knowing as I did how it was haunted.
The crisis was perilous; but not without its charm: such as the Indian, perhaps, feels when he slips over the rapid in his canoe.
I was surly; but the thing would not go: it stood by me with strange perseverance, and looked and spoke with a sort of authority.
Remembering what it was—what countless systems there swept space like a soft trace of light—I felt the might and strength of God.
“Yes, very.”

“But you’ve never been to a boarding-school?”

“I was at a boarding-school eight years.”

She opened her eyes wide.
“A lovely evening, but late for you to be out alone,” he said, as he crushed the snowy heads of the closed flowers with his foot.
She turned twice to gaze after him as she tripped fairy-like down the field; he, as he strode firmly across, never turned at all.
“A well-executed picture,” he said; “very soft, clear colouring; very graceful and correct drawing.”

“Yes, yes; I know all that.
Jealousy had got hold of him: she stung him; but the sting was salutary: it gave him respite from the gnawing fang of melancholy.
I might have seen there was too great a disparity between the ages of the parties to make it likely that they were man and wife.
I had just fastened our pinafores together, and hung them up for a curtain, when in comes Joseph, on an errand from the stables.
I sat shuddering, yet, and wiping the perspiration from my forehead: the intruder appeared to hesitate, and muttered to himself.
‘That’s Miss Earnshaw?’ he whispered to his mother, ‘and look how Skulker has bitten her—how her foot bleeds!’

“‘Miss Earnshaw?
And besides, you should have known better than to choose such a rush of a lass!’”

“And what did the master answer?” I inquired.
Hindley lavished on her a torrent of scornful abuse, and bade her get to her room immediately, or she shouldn’t cry for nothing!
Something stirred in the porch; and, moving nearer, I distinguished a tall man dressed in dark clothes, with dark face and hair.
“Why, I met on the road a lad that fetches milk here,” she stammered, “and he asked whether we weren’t in trouble at the Grange.
By the fire stood a ruffianly child, strong in limb and dirty in garb, with a look of Catherine in his eyes and about his mouth.
I had made up my mind not to give it till my master went somewhere, as I could not guess how its receipt would affect Catherine.
It was very, very sad: and while I read I sighed, for it seemed as if all joy had vanished from the world, never to be restored.
As he was the first to injure, make him the first to implore pardon; and then—why then, Ellen, I might show you some generosity.
My feet were thoroughly wetted; I was cross and low; exactly the humour suited for making the most of these disagreeable things.
“Oh, I hope you’ll die in a garret, starved to death!” said the boy, mistaking our approach for that of his negligent attendant.
speak to me.”

“I can’t speak to you,” he murmured; “you’ve hurt me so that I shall lie awake all night choking with this cough.
Despise me as much as you please; I am a worthless, cowardly wretch: I can’t be scorned enough; but I’m too mean for your anger.
And do you imagine that beautiful young lady, that healthy, hearty girl, will tie herself to a little perishing monkey like you?
They will live in the kitchen, and the rest will be shut up.”

“For the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it?” I observed.
You think I have no feelings, and that I can do without one bit of love or kindness; but I cannot live so: and you have no pity.
I’ll ask cook to bake you a little cake, and then you shall help me to look over your drawers; for I am soon to pack your trunk.
I was stiff with long sitting, and bewildered with the noise and motion of the coach: gathering my faculties, I looked about me.
Is this the first time you have left your parents to come to school, my little girl?”

I explained to her that I had no parents.
Mrs. Fairfax folded up her knitting: I took my portfolio: we curtseyed to him, received a frigid bow in return, and so withdrew.
“I will put her to some test,” thought I: “such absolute impenetrability is past comprehension.”

“Good morning, Grace,” I said.
More unequal matches are made every day.”

“True: yet I should scarcely fancy Mr. Rochester would entertain an idea of the sort.
I heard the dining-room door unclose; a gentleman came out; rising hastily, I stood face to face with him: it was Mr. Rochester.
The saying might have worn out of my memory, had not a circumstance immediately followed which served indelibly to fix it there.
I had not notified to Mrs. Fairfax the exact day of my return; for I did not wish either car or carriage to meet me at Millcote.
“Hasten to take off your wet things,” said he; “and before you go, good-night—good-night, my darling!”

He kissed me repeatedly.
I was about mechanically to obey him, without further remonstrance; but as he helped me into the carriage, he looked at my face.
Real affection, it seemed, he could not have for me; it had been only fitful passion: that was balked; he would want me no more.
Provided with plenty of money and the passport of an old name, I could choose my own society: no circles were closed against me.
Despair added, “Farewell for ever!”

That night I never thought to sleep; but a slumber fell on me as soon as I lay down in bed.
I had a feeling that she wished me away: that she did not understand me or my circumstances; that she was prejudiced against me.
“You will find she is some young lady who has had a misunderstanding with her friends, and has probably injudiciously left them.
I understood, as by inspiration, the nature of his love for Miss Oliver; I agreed with him that it was but a love of the senses.
With St. Paul, I acknowledge myself the chiefest of sinners; but I do not suffer this sense of my personal vileness to daunt me.
“Deeply: he will never forgive me, I fear: yet I offered to accompany him as his sister.”

“It was frantic folly to do so, Jane.
I filled the interval in walking softly about my room, and pondering the visitation which had given my plans their present bent.
A person whose goodness consists rather in his guiltlessness of vice, than in his prowess in virtue.”

“He is untiringly active.
“Wretched inmates!” I ejaculated, mentally, “you deserve perpetual isolation from your species for your churlish inhospitality.
However, I went, through wind and rain, and brought one, the doctor, back with me; the other said he would come in the morning.
There is no need to be frantic!”

“I know you didn’t like him,” she answered, repressing a little the intensity of her delight.
“She’s sadly put out by Mr. Heathcliff’s behaviour: and, indeed, I do think it’s time to arrange his visits on another footing.
In the midst of my agitation, I was sincerely glad to observe that Catherine’s arms had fallen relaxed, and her head hung down.
It is, if I may take an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; for every wrench of agony return a wrench: reduce him to my level.
So deep and sensitive was his aversion, that he refrained from going anywhere where he was likely to see or hear of Heathcliff.
A woman whom I knew, and who formerly lived at Gimmerton, answered: she had been servant there since the death of Mr. Earnshaw.
“Hush, Master Heathcliff!” I said; “that’s your father’s tale, too, I suppose.”

“It isn’t: you hold your tongue!” he answered.
“But I couldn’t have been hurt by that little push, and I had no idea that you could, either: you’re not much, are you, Linton?
I’d not care one moment for Linton being Heathcliff’s son; nor for his taking her from me, if he could console her for my loss.
And, in the morning, I often feel sick—papa says I grow so fast.”

Badly satisfied, Cathy sat down, and he reclined beside her.
I ought to have sweat blood then, from the anguish of my yearning—from the fervour of my supplications to have but one glimpse!
He spoke to none of us, ate very little, and went out directly afterwards, intimating that he should not return before evening.
It is far from being the case: I have lost the faculty of enjoying their destruction, and I am too idle to destroy for nothing.
I could not think him dead: but his face and throat were washed with rain; the bed-clothes dripped, and he was perfectly still.
Red hair, ma’am, curled—curled all over?” And extending his cane he pointed to the awful object, his hand shaking as he did so.
Now I wept: Helen Burns was not here; nothing sustained me; left to myself I abandoned myself, and my tears watered the boards.
CHAPTER XIII
Mr. Rochester, it seems, by the surgeon’s orders, went to bed early that night; nor did he rise soon next morning.
I had a single little pearl ornament which Miss Temple gave me as a parting keepsake: I put it on, and then we went downstairs.
She hastened to ring the bell; and when the tray came, she proceeded to arrange the cups, spoons, &c., with assiduous celerity.
“You have been resident in my house three months?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And you came from—?”

“From Lowood school, in ——shire.”

“Ah!
The second picture contained for foreground only the dim peak of a hill, with grass and some leaves slanting as if by a breeze.
During the intervening period I had no time to nurse chimeras; and I believe I was as active and gay as anybody—Adèle excepted.
The hall lamp was now lit, and it amused her to look over the balustrade and watch the servants passing backwards and forwards.
They dispersed about the room, reminding me, by the lightness and buoyancy of their movements, of a flock of white plumy birds.
I have formed my plans—right plans I deem them—and in them I have attended to the claims of conscience, the counsels of reason.
“Five shillings, sir.” He took the purse, poured the hoard into his palm, and chuckled over it as if its scantiness amused him.
Give me back nine pounds, Jane; I’ve a use for it.”

“And so have I, sir,” I returned, putting my hands and my purse behind me.
This I felt sure was Eliza, though I could trace little resemblance to her former self in that elongated and colourless visage.
How is the money to be had?”

Bessie now endeavoured to persuade her to take a sedative draught: she succeeded with difficulty.
Two hours she devoted to her diary; two to working by herself in the kitchen-garden; and one to the regulation of her accounts.
I have known you, Mr. Rochester; and it strikes me with terror and anguish to feel I absolutely must be torn from you for ever.
He was taking off my shawl in the hall, and shaking the water out of my loosened hair, when Mrs. Fairfax emerged from her room.
Gentlemen in his station are not accustomed to marry their governesses.”

I was growing truly irritated: happily, Adèle ran in.
Still bright on clouds of suffering dim
Shines that soft, solemn joy;
Nor care I now, how dense and grim
Disasters gather nigh.
My eyes were covered and closed: eddying darkness seemed to swim round me, and reflection came in as black and confused a flow.
You think me an unfeeling, loose-principled rake: don’t you?”

“I don’t like you so well as I have done sometimes, indeed, sir.
I did not then know that it was no transitory blossom, but rather the radiant resemblance of one, cut in an indestructible gem.
It showed no variation but of tint: green, where rush and moss overgrew the marshes; black, where the dry soil bore only heath.
I should but knock at the door to have it shut in my face.”

And I sank down where I stood, and hid my face against the ground.
Mr. Rivers now closed his book, approached the table, and, as he took a seat, fixed his blue pictorial-looking eyes full on me.
No.”

I felt a burning glow mount to my face; for bitter and agitating recollections were awakened by the allusion to marriage.
I promised myself the pleasure of colouring it; and, as it was getting late then, I told her she must come and sit another day.
Besides, I was out of practice in talking to him: his reserve was again frozen over, and my frankness was congealed beneath it.
you used to call Jane your third sister, but you don’t treat her as such: you should kiss her too.”

She pushed me towards him.
Shut my eyes as I would, these last words of his succeeded in making the way, which had seemed blocked up, comparatively clear.
He will never love me; but he shall approve me; I will show him energies he has not yet seen, resources he has never suspected.
Mary and I had both concluded he wished you to marry him.”

“He does—he has asked me to be his wife.”

Diana clapped her hands.
He thus grasps and cries, and gazes, because he no longer fears to waken by any sound he can utter—by any movement he can make.
He sat in his chair—still, but not at rest: expectant evidently; the lines of now habitual sadness marking his strong features.
“It’s a pity he cannot kill himself with drink,” observed Heathcliff, muttering an echo of curses back when the door was shut.
It’s bonny behaviour, lurking amang t’ fields, after twelve o’ t’ night, wi’ that fahl, flaysome divil of a gipsy, Heathcliff!
To be absent and silent for three years, and never to think of me!”

“A little more than you have thought of me,” he murmured.
I nobbut wish he may.”

And so he went on scolding to his den beneath, taking the candle with him; and I remained in the dark.
They flew off at my approach, and he raised his eyes and spoke:—“She’s dead!” he said; “I’ve not waited for you to learn that.
After turning over as many as I thought proper, I tied them in a handkerchief and set them aside, relocking the vacant drawer.
CHAPTER XXVII
Seven days glided away, every one marking its course by the henceforth rapid alteration of Edgar Linton’s state.
The bog-water got into her head, and she would have run home quite flighty; but I fixed her till she came round to her senses.
I’ve often groaned aloud, till that old rascal Joseph no doubt believed that my conscience was playing the fiend inside of me.
I want none of your prying at my house!”

He signed her to precede him; and casting back a look that cut my heart, she obeyed.
tell me that.”

“Zillah left, and Mr. Heathcliff wished me to come, soon after you went to London, and stay till you returned.
Helen regarded me, probably with surprise: I could not now abate my agitation, though I tried hard; I continued to weep aloud.
Indisposed to hesitate, and full of impatient impulses—soul and senses quivering with keen throes—I put it back and looked in.
I desired liberty; for liberty I gasped; for liberty I uttered a prayer; it seemed scattered on the wind then faintly blowing.
In this room, too, there was a cabinet piano, quite new and of superior tone; also an easel for painting and a pair of globes.
This lane inclined up-hill all the way to Hay; having reached the middle, I sat down on a stile which led thence into a field.
You had not enough of the artist’s skill and science to give it full being: yet the drawings are, for a school-girl, peculiar.
But I don’t mean to flatter you: if you are cast in a different mould to the majority, it is no merit of yours: Nature did it.
My Spring is gone, however, but it has left me that French floweret on my hands, which, in some moods, I would fain be rid of.
But you see there is a considerable difference in age: Mr. Rochester is nearly forty; she is but twenty-five.”

“What of that?
Meantime, Mr. Rochester had again summoned the ladies round him, and was selecting certain of their number to be of his party.
“Drink, Richard: it will give you the heart you lack, for an hour or so.”

“But will it hurt me?—is it inflammatory?”

“Drink!
I tell you this plainly; and listen: for though I shall no more repeat what I am now about to say, I shall steadily act on it.
Rochester, let me look at your face: turn to the moonlight.”

“Why?”

“Because I want to read your countenance—turn!”

“There!
“Ask something more,” he said presently; “it is my delight to be entreated, and to yield.”

I was again ready with my request.
He said I was a capricious witch, and that he would rather sing another time; but I averred that no time was like the present.
Mr. Eyre mentioned the intelligence; for he knew that my client here was acquainted with a gentleman of the name of Rochester.
“Now for the hitch in Jane’s character,” he said at last, speaking more calmly than from his look I had expected him to speak.
Place her in safety and comfort: shelter her degradation with secrecy, and leave her.’

“I acted precisely on this suggestion.
“Mak’ ’em into pies.”

“Give them to me and I’ll pick them.”

“Nay; I dunnut want ye to do nought.”

“But I must do something.
Hannah says you have had nothing but some gruel since breakfast.”

I did not refuse it, for my appetite was awakened and keen.
“Which, if you like, you have, in my opinion, a right to keep, both from St. John and every other questioner,” remarked Diana.
I liked to learn of her: I saw the part of instructress pleased and suited her; that of scholar pleased and suited me no less.
I know I am: but how did you find it out?”

“I was speaking of myself.”

“Well, if you are not ambitious, you are—” He paused.
I was absorbed in the execution of these nice details, when, after one rapid tap, my door unclosed, admitting St. John Rivers.
Your fortune is vested in the English funds; Briggs has the will and the necessary documents.”

Here was a new card turned up!
He had performed an act of duty; made an exertion; felt his own strength to do and deny, and was on better terms with himself.
He does not care for that: when my time came to die, he would resign me, in all serenity and sanctity, to the God who gave me.
“Seek one elsewhere than in me, St. John: seek one fitted to you.”

“One fitted to my purpose, you mean—fitted to my vocation.
A calm, subdued triumph, blent with a longing earnestness, marked his enunciation of the last glorious verses of that chapter.
“Ere many days,” I said, as I terminated my musings, “I will know something of him whose voice seemed last night to summon me.
Divine justice pursued its course; disasters came thick on me: I was forced to pass through the valley of the shadow of death.
“You’d better let the dog alone,” growled Mr. Heathcliff in unison, checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of his foot.
An immediate interest kindled within me for the unknown Catherine, and I began forthwith to decipher her faded hieroglyphics.
Are they an old family?”

“Very old, sir; and Hareton is the last of them, as our Miss Cathy is of us—I mean, of the Lintons.
This endurance made old Earnshaw furious, when he discovered his son persecuting the poor fatherless child, as he called him.
or find us by ourselves, seeking entertainment in yelling, and sobbing, and rolling on the ground, divided by the whole room?
As I reached them, Hindley leant forward on the rails to listen to a noise below; almost forgetting what he had in his hands.
She came in and lay down on the settle, all soaked as she was, turning her face to the back, and putting her hands before it.
It was about the period that my narrative has reached: a bright frosty afternoon; the ground bare, and the road hard and dry.
I felt no inclination to tarry the event; and, resolving to seek medical aid on my own responsibility, I quitted the chamber.
I hardly think he’ll be taken in again.”

“And does Miss Linton turn a cold shoulder on him?” was the doctor’s next question.
I should laugh and dance for joy, if I found their absence was the total of my miseries, and the rest was an unnatural dream!
I expostulated, and desired that he should have his in a mug; affirming that I could not taste the liquid treated so dirtily.
In the evening the weather broke: the wind shifted from south to north-east, and brought rain first, and then sleet and snow.
His attention was roused, I saw, for his eyes rained down tears among the ashes, and he drew his breath in suffocating sighs.
He recalled her memory with ardent, tender love, and hopeful aspiring to the better world; where he doubted not she was gone.
I repeated its substance on my return; and Edgar Linton, little interested at the commencement, spoke no more of interfering.
“I’ve neither taken any nor found any,” she said, as I toiled to them, expanding her hands in corroboration of the statement.
I’m glad you have no chance of having him for a husband, Miss Catherine.”

My companion waxed serious at hearing this speech.
Last winter, I did not think, at another twelve months’ end, I should be amusing a stranger to the family with relating them!
“And my money,” she continued; returning his angry glare, and meantime biting a piece of crust, the remnant of her breakfast.
I’ll kill her, Ellen Dean, if you let her come into my sight again!”

Hareton tried, under his breath, to persuade her to go.
This reproach of my dependence had become a vague sing-song in my ear: very painful and crushing, but only half intelligible.
Have mercy, Aunt Reed!’ And that punishment you made me suffer because your wicked boy struck me—knocked me down for nothing.
A clock in the schoolroom struck nine; Miss Miller left her circle, and standing in the middle of the room, cried—

“Silence!
“It is to be done on my responsibility,” she added, in an explanatory tone to them, and immediately afterwards left the room.
Sometimes their feet failed them, and they sank together in a heap; they were then propped up with the monitors’ high stools.
CHAPTER VIII
Ere the half-hour ended, five o’clock struck; school was dismissed, and all were gone into the refectory to tea.
There were the two wings of the building; there was the garden; there were the skirts of Lowood; there was the hilly horizon.
“Is Miss Eyre there?” now demanded the master, half rising from his seat to look round to the door, near which I still stood.
How I do still abhor—”

He ground his teeth and was silent: he arrested his step and struck his boot against the hard ground.
I grew weary: it was cold, in spite of the cloak; and then I did not see the use of staying, as I was not to rouse the house.
Meantime, I am glad that you are the only person, besides myself, acquainted with the precise details of to-night’s incident.
The dessert was not carried out till after nine; and at ten footmen were still running to and fro with trays and coffee-cups.
Fortunately there was another entrance to the drawing-room than that through the saloon where they were all seated at dinner.
and so are sympathies; and so are signs; and the three combined make one mystery to which humanity has not yet found the key.
He hurried me up the walk, through the grounds, and into the house; but we were quite wet before we could pass the threshold.
I could not be certain of the reality till I had seen Mr. Rochester again, and heard him renew his words of love and promise.
Did you think nothing of Miss Ingram’s feelings, sir?”

“Her feelings are concentrated in one—pride; and that needs humbling.
Her relatives encouraged me; competitors piqued me; she allured me: a marriage was achieved almost before I knew where I was.
If a gust of wind swept the waste, I looked up, fearing it was the rush of a bull; if a plover whistled, I imagined it a man.
I saw ripe bilberries gleaming here and there, like jet beads in the heath: I gathered a handful and ate them with the bread.
Both the sisters seemed struck: not shocked or appalled; the tidings appeared in their eyes rather momentous than afflicting.
Was I very gleeful, settled, content, during the hours I passed in yonder bare, humble schoolroom this morning and afternoon?
While I was eagerly glancing at the bright pages of “Marmion” (for “Marmion” it was), St. John stooped to examine my drawing.
Reason, and not feeling, is my guide; my ambition is unlimited: my desire to rise higher, to do more than others, insatiable.
“One drift took me up to the waist; happily the snow is quite soft yet.”

“But why are you come?” I could not forbear saying.
I like Moor House, and I will live at Moor House; I like Diana and Mary, and I will attach myself for life to Diana and Mary.
He felt the greatness and goodness of his purpose so sincerely: others who heard him plead for it, could not but feel it too.
He relinquished the endeavour, folded his arms, and stood quiet and mute in the rain, now falling fast on his uncovered head.
He means well: but you shrug your shoulders to hear him talk?”

“He talks little, sir: what he does say is ever to the point.
you think me, I daresay, an irreligious dog: but my heart swells with gratitude to the beneficent God of this earth just now.
Mary’s is a clergyman, a college friend of her brother’s, and, from his attainments and principles, worthy of the connection.
Merely the branch of a fir-tree that touched my lattice as the blast wailed by, and rattled its dry cones against the panes!
I wish you were at the—” commenced my host, setting the candle on a chair, because he found it impossible to hold it steady.
‘They have let the bull-dog loose, and he holds me!’ The devil had seized her ankle, Nelly: I heard his abominable snorting.
“I think he swore: but I didn’t mind him, I was straining to see the bairn,” and she began again to describe it rapturously.
He had a sweet, low manner of speaking, and pronounced his words as you do: that’s less gruff than we talk here, and softer.
Her lips were half asunder, as if she meant to speak, and she drew a breath; but it escaped in a sigh instead of a sentence.
I cannot express it; but surely you and everybody have a notion that there is or should be an existence of yours beyond you.
It proved the commencement of delirium: Mr. Kenneth, as soon as he saw her, pronounced her dangerously ill; she had a fever.
She would not hear of staying a second longer: in truth, I felt rather disposed to defer the sequel of her narrative myself.
I am not your husband: you needn’t be jealous of me!”

“I’m not jealous of you,” replied the mistress; “I’m jealous for you.
If Edgar Linton meets me, I shall not hesitate to knock him down, and give him enough to insure his quiescence while I stay.
I won’t stray five yards from your window.”

“You must not go!” she answered, holding him as firmly as her strength allowed.
But, I thought in my mind, Hindley, with apparently the stronger head, has shown himself sadly the worse and the weaker man.
Wuthering Heights and Mr. Heathcliff did not exist for her: she was a perfect recluse; and, apparently, perfectly contented.
I want to see where the goblin-hunter rises in the marsh, and to hear about the fairishes, as you call them: but make haste!
and you must have led the way in writing such absurdities: he would not have thought of beginning, I’m certain.”

“I didn’t!
Michael came to ask if he must saddle Minny; I said ‘Yes,’ and considered myself doing a duty as she bore me over the hills.
Last Sunday, indeed, coming earlier than usual, I heard him abusing poor Linton cruelly for his conduct of the night before.
Anybody else would have been incapable of regarding the childish act with sternness, but he scowled on her and muttered—“Oh!
I didn’t fear that her fool of a husband would wander up the glen so late; and no one else had business to bring them there.
Hareton and Joseph, who had been wakened by the ringing and the sound of feet, and heard our talk from outside, now entered.
I’m driven down here by the cold; not either to amuse you or enjoy your society.’

“‘What could I ha’ done?’ began Earnshaw.
Under the porch, a girl of nine or ten sat knitting, and an old woman reclined on the housesteps, smoking a meditative pipe.
If you would hear me without being angry, I might offer some advice that would make you happier.”

“What is that?” he asked.
Daylight began to forsake the red-room; it was past four o’clock, and the beclouded afternoon was tending to drear twilight.
Yes, I was right: it was Mr. Brocklehurst, buttoned up in a surtout, and looking longer, narrower, and more rigid than ever.
Who is it?”

“Some of the servants, very likely,” she answered: “perhaps Grace Poole.”

“Did you hear it?” I again inquired.
There was a smile on his lips, and his eyes sparkled, whether with wine or not, I am not sure; but I think it very probable.
They set out early in the forenoon, some on horseback, the rest in carriages; I witnessed both the departure and the return.
Again she regarded me so icily, I felt at once that her opinion of me—her feeling towards me—was unchanged and unchangeable.
I shall take up my abode in a religious house near Lisle—a nunnery you would call it; there I shall be quiet and unmolested.
I wish this present hour would never end: who knows with what fate the next may come charged?”

“This is hypochondria, Jane.
In seeking these articles, I encountered the beads of a pearl necklace Mr. Rochester had forced me to accept a few days ago.
I sought the key of the side-door in the kitchen; I sought, too, a phial of oil and a feather; I oiled the key and the lock.
I believe it was a lovely summer morning: I know my shoes, which I had put on when I left the house, were soon wet with dew.
He further gave me leave to get into the inside, as the vehicle was empty: I entered, was shut in, and it rolled on its way.
He had a right, of course, to do as he pleased: and yet a momentary damp is cast on the spirits by the receipt of such news.
He seemed to say, with his sad and resolute look, if he did not say it with his lips, “I love you, and I know you prefer me.
Suddenly it stood still to an inexpressible feeling that thrilled it through, and passed at once to my head and extremities.
Meantime, watch and pray that you enter not into temptation: the spirit, I trust, is willing, but the flesh, I see, is weak.
“Is he in England?”

“Ay—ay—he’s in England; he can’t get out of England, I fancy—he’s a fixture now.”

What agony was this!
His old dog, Pilot, lay on one side, removed out of the way, and coiled up as if afraid of being inadvertently trodden upon.
I hold myself supremely blest—blest beyond what language can express; because I am my husband’s life as fully as he is mine.
“What the devil is the matter?” he asked, eyeing me in a manner that I could ill endure, after this inhospitable treatment.
The vehemence of my agitation brought on a copious bleeding at the nose, and still Heathcliff laughed, and still I scolded.
And that minx, Catherine Linton, or Earnshaw, or however she was called—she must have been a changeling—wicked little soul!
I guessed, however, by his irregular and intercepted breathing, that he struggled to vanquish an excess of violent emotion.
He got on to the bed, and wrenched open the lattice, bursting, as he pulled at it, into an uncontrollable passion of tears.
“I guess she is; yet she looks bravely,” replied the girl, “and she talks as if she thought of living to see it grow a man.
From that period, for several months, she ceased to hold any communication with me, save in the relation of a mere servant.
“As lads they had an aversion to each other, and Heathcliff would hate just as much to hear him praised: it’s human nature.
The master directed me to follow; I did, to her chamber-door: she hindered me from going further by securing it against me.
This is the last thing of his I have about me:” she slipped the gold ring from her third finger, and threw it on the floor.
Has papa been, Ellen?”

“Papa would tell you, Miss,” I answered, hastily, “that they are not worth the trouble of visiting.
“What business brings you here to-night?”

“It’s Maister Linton I mun spake to,” he answered, waving me disdainfully aside.
What is his usual food, Nelly?”

I suggested boiled milk or tea; and the housekeeper received instructions to prepare some.
Minny and I went flying home as light as air; and I dreamt of Wuthering Heights and my sweet, darling cousin, till morning.
Miss Linton, I shall enjoy myself remarkably in thinking your father will be miserable: I shall not sleep for satisfaction.
I believe I shall not live there any more.”

“Oh, indeed; you’re tired of being banished from the world, are you?” he said.
Then they came to the door, and from their conversation I judged they were about to issue out and have a walk on the moors.
He might have had a monomania on the subject of his departed idol; but on every other point his wits were as sound as mine.
“You must be hungry, rambling about all night!” I wanted to discover where he had been, but I did not like to ask directly.
I heard her sweeping away; and soon after she was gone, I suppose I had a species of fit: unconsciousness closed the scene.
She might as well have said to the fire, “don’t burn!” but how could she divine the morbid suffering to which I was a prey?
“Fetch that stool,” said Mr. Brocklehurst, pointing to a very high one from which a monitor had just risen: it was brought.
We all must die one day, and the illness which is removing me is not painful; it is gentle and gradual: my mind is at rest.
I found my pupil sufficiently docile, though disinclined to apply: she had not been used to regular occupation of any kind.
“Et cela doit signifier,” said she, “qu’il y aura là dedans un cadeau pour moi, et peut-être pour vous aussi, mademoiselle.
While he is so occupied, I will tell you, reader, what they are: and first, I must premise that they are nothing wonderful.
You are still bent on going?”

“It has struck nine, sir.”

“Never mind,—wait a minute: Adèle is not ready to go to bed yet.
My first impulse was to rise and fasten the bolt; my next, again to cry out, “Who is there?”

Something gurgled and moaned.
I thought no more of Mrs. Fairfax; I thought no more of Grace Poole, or the laugh: in an instant, I was within the chamber.
There she sat, staid and taciturn-looking, as usual, in her brown stuff gown, her check apron, white handkerchief, and cap.
The next day was as fine as its predecessor: it was devoted by the party to an excursion to some site in the neighbourhood.
He looked at me: I happened to be near him, as I had been fastening the clasp of Mrs. Dent’s bracelet, which had got loose.
It seems to me that she might, by merely sitting quietly at his side, saying little and looking less, get nigher his heart.
“Hold the candle,” said Mr. Rochester, and I took it: he fetched a basin of water from the washstand: “Hold that,” said he.
He made a curious grimace—one of his strange and equivocal demonstrations—threw down his cue and followed me from the room.
I have talked, face to face, with what I reverence, with what I delight in,—with an original, a vigorous, an expanded mind.
This is what I have to ask,—Why did you take such pains to make me believe you wished to marry Miss Ingram?”

“Is that all?
Beg him to let me go, mademoiselle.”

“That I will, Adèle;” and I hastened away with her, glad to quit my gloomy monitress.
And haunted as a robber-path
Through wilderness or wood;
For Might and Right, and Woe and Wrath,
Between our spirits stood.
My love has placed her little hand
With noble faith in mine,
And vowed that wedlock’s sacred band
Our nature shall entwine.
“Very good,” I thought; “you may fume and fidget as you please: but this is the best plan to pursue with you, I am certain.
Still, society associated my name and person with hers; I yet saw her and heard her daily: something of her breath (faugh!)
Is it better to drive a fellow-creature to despair than to transgress a mere human law, no man being injured by the breach?
When I got there, I was forced to sit to rest me under the hedge; and while I sat, I heard wheels, and saw a coach come on.
I asked where it was going: the driver named a place a long way off, and where I was sure Mr. Rochester had no connections.
Poor folk mun get on as they can.”

She seemed to be tired of my questions: and, indeed, what claim had I to importune her?
“I am, sir.” It is my way—it always was my way, by instinct—ever to meet the brief with brevity, the direct with plainness.
As to Mr. St John, the intimacy which had arisen so naturally and rapidly between me and his sisters did not extend to him.
Morton, when I came to it two years ago, had no school: the children of the poor were excluded from every hope of progress.
When you are at Madagascar, or at the Cape, or in India, would it be a consolation to have that memento in your possession?
Rochester, I have just discovered the sun is far declined from its meridian, and Pilot is actually gone home to his dinner.
Catherine loved it too: but she said it sounded sweetest at the top of the steps, and she went up in the dark: I followed.
When she came, I felt convinced we shouldn’t keep her long; and now, I must tell you, the winter will probably finish her.
Catherine!” interposed Linton, greatly shocked at the double fault of falsehood and violence which his idol had committed.
or did he get a sizar’s place at college, or escape to America, and earn honours by drawing blood from his foster-country?
Now, fully revealed by the fire and candlelight, I was amazed, more than ever, to behold the transformation of Heathcliff.
She is better acquainted with his heart than I, or any one besides; and she never would represent him as worse than he is.
I started: my bodily eye was cheated into a momentary belief that the child lifted its face and stared straight into mine!
There was another rapid glance at the house, and supposing himself unseen, the scoundrel had the impudence to embrace her.
Is he weeping, or is he going to faint for fear?”

The fellow approached and gave the chair on which Linton rested a push.
I made up my mind for broken bones, at least; but she only glared about her for an instant, and then rushed from the room.
This feather was picked up from the heath, the bird was not shot: we saw its nest in the winter, full of little skeletons.
The dog’s endeavour to avoid him was unsuccessful; as I guessed by a scutter downstairs, and a prolonged, piteous yelping.
But tell him, also, to set his fraternal and magisterial heart at ease: that I keep strictly within the limits of the law.
Mrs. Linton sat in a loose white dress, with a light shawl over her shoulders, in the recess of the open window, as usual.
Gimmerton chapel bells were still ringing; and the full, mellow flow of the beck in the valley came soothingly on the ear.
He kept himself sober for the purpose—tolerably sober: not going to bed mad at six o’clock and getting up drunk at twelve.
Whether the angels have fed him, or his kin beneath, I cannot tell; but he has not eaten a meal with us for nearly a week.
She did not comprehend it; and hard work I had to obtain a promise that she would not lay the grievance before her father.
The pure heather-scented air, the bright sunshine, and the gentle canter of Minny, relieved his despondency after a while.
But that consideration is sufficient: he’s as safe with me, and shall be tended as carefully as your master tends his own.
We’ll hope there are years and years to come before any of us go: master is young, and I am strong, and hardly forty-five.
“And to-morrow, Catherine, will you be here to-morrow?” asked young Heathcliff, holding her frock as she rose reluctantly.
He made several efforts to obey, but his little strength was annihilated for the time, and he fell back again with a moan.
He shudders if I touch him.”

“Linton dear!” whispered Catherine, “I can’t go to Wuthering Heights: papa has forbidden me.
Her father shall see her, I vowed, and vowed again, if that devil be killed on his own doorstones in trying to prevent it!
I shall be a great deal more comfortable now; and you’ll have a better chance of keeping me underground, when I get there.
They are of no use to you; or else you concealed them in the bad spirit that, as you cannot enjoy them, nobody else shall.
The little rogue thought I had not seen her, and, drawing back, she took her former station by the window, quite demurely.
All said I was wicked, and perhaps I might be so; what thought had I been but just conceiving of starving myself to death?
This precious vessel was now placed on my knee, and I was cordially invited to eat the circlet of delicate pastry upon it.
I shall send Miss Temple notice that she is to expect a new girl, so that there will be no difficulty about receiving her.
Mrs. Reed looked up from her work; her eye settled on mine, her fingers at the same time suspended their nimble movements.
I could make no sense of the subject; my own thoughts swam always between me and the page I had usually found fascinating.
Well, but Missis and the young ladies and Master John are going out to tea this afternoon, and you shall have tea with me.
The fear of failure in these points harassed me worse than the physical hardships of my lot; though these were no trifles.
Meantime, Mr. Brocklehurst, standing on the hearth with his hands behind his back, majestically surveyed the whole school.
Has a girl of fourteen a heart large enough, vigorous enough, to hold the swelling spring of pure, full, fervid eloquence?
Mary Ann remarked that she supposed some one must be very ill, as Mr. Bates had been sent for at that time of the evening.
About ten minutes after, the driver got down and opened a pair of gates: we passed through, and they clashed to behind us.
I keep it and rear it rather on the Roman Catholic principle of expiating numerous sins, great or small, by one good work.
Why my hand shook, and why I involuntarily spilt half the contents of my cup into my saucer, I did not choose to consider.
Her face was like her mother’s; a youthful unfurrowed likeness: the same low brow, the same high features, the same pride.
“No,” I heard her say: “she looks too stupid for any game of the sort.”

Ere long a bell tinkled, and the curtain drew up.
A sufficient interval having elapsed for the performers to resume their ordinary costume, they re-entered the dining-room.
His eye wandered, and had no meaning in its wandering: this gave him an odd look, such as I never remembered to have seen.
I felt now as composed as ever I did in my life: there was nothing indeed in the gipsy’s appearance to trouble one’s calm.
Jane, when will you watch with me again?”

“Whenever I can be useful, sir.”

“For instance, the night before I am married!
I wrote to him; I said I was sorry for his disappointment, but Jane Eyre was dead: she had died of typhus fever at Lowood.
If, in the moments I and my pupil spent with him, I lacked spirits and sank into inevitable dejection, he became even gay.
Jane, will you marry me?”

Still I did not answer, and still I writhed myself from his grasp: for I was still incredulous.
“You need not look in that way,” I said; “if you do, I’ll wear nothing but my old Lowood frocks to the end of the chapter.
I shall continue to act as Adèle’s governess; by that I shall earn my board and lodging, and thirty pounds a year besides.
“Thank God!” he exclaimed, “that if anything malignant did come near you last night, it was only the veil that was harmed.
Oh, to think what might have happened!”

He drew his breath short, and strained me so close to him, I could scarcely pant.
“Nothing in the world,” was the reply; and, replacing the paper, I saw him dexterously tear a narrow slip from the margin.
It is better, therefore, for the insignificant to keep out of his way, lest, in his progress, he should trample them down.
I felt veneration for St. John—veneration so strong that its impetus thrust me at once to the point I had so long shunned.
We exchanged little conversation, and he halted at the entrance of Thrushcross Park, saying, I could make no error there.
I should be miserable all night, and I won’t be miserable for you!”

“Can I stay after you have struck me?” asked Linton.
And now I’ll cry—I’ll cry myself sick!”

She dropped down on her knees by a chair, and set to weeping in serious earnest.
I turned about to discover who spoke, fearfully; for the doors were shut, and I had seen nobody on approaching the steps.
Wuthering Heights rose above this silvery vapour; but our old house was invisible; it rather dips down on the other side.
“My poor mistress is ill, and she quite masters me: I cannot manage her at all; pray, come and persuade her to go to bed.
His first act was to elevate his torch to a level with my face, squint malignantly, project his under-lip, and turn away.
The single pleasure I can imagine is to die, or to see him dead!”

“There—that will do for the present!” said Heathcliff.
Why, this is the road upstairs, child!”

He seized, and thrust her from the room; and returned muttering—“I have no pity!
Her appearance was altered, as I had told Heathcliff; but when she was calm, there seemed unearthly beauty in the change.
It is from Mr. Heathcliff.”

There was a start and a troubled gleam of recollection, and a struggle to arrange her ideas.
His adversary had fallen senseless with excessive pain and the flow of blood, that gushed from an artery or a large vein.
“Because they are a great deal higher up than we are,” replied I; “you could not climb them, they are too high and steep.
I have it carefully preserved in a little glass box; and I’ve often thought what a pleasure it would be to see its owner.
Joseph stood by his master’s chair telling some tale concerning a lame horse; and Hareton was preparing for the hayfield.
“Cannot ate it?” repeated he, peering in Linton’s face, and subduing his voice to a whisper, for fear of being overheard.
Having opened, I emptied the whole contents into my apron, and took them with me to examine at leisure in my own chamber.
“And are you glad to see me?” asked she, reiterating her former question and pleased to detect the faint dawn of a smile.
I settled his doubts, by suddenly retrieving my gravity and desiring him to walk away, for I came to see Linton, not him.
I went at five o’clock, and walked; fancying I might manage to creep into the house, and up to Linton’s room, unobserved.
Ellen, I’ve been very happy with my little Cathy: through winter nights and summer days she was a living hope at my side.
As I hesitated whether to go off at once, or return and seek my mistress, a slight cough drew my attention to the hearth.
My confessions have not relieved me; but they may account for some otherwise unaccountable phases of humour which I show.
Now, I’ll teach you to rummage my bookshelves: for they are mine; all the house belongs to me, or will do in a few years.
I saw a light, and I thought a ghost would come.” I had now got hold of Bessie’s hand, and she did not snatch it from me.
Thanks being returned for what we had not got, and a second hymn chanted, the refectory was evacuated for the schoolroom.
I was the first who spoke—

“Helen, why do you stay with a girl whom everybody believes to be a liar?”

“Everybody, Jane?
“This will be your luggage, I suppose?” said the man rather abruptly when he saw me, pointing to my trunk in the passage.
Having opened my chamber window, and seen that I left all things straight and neat on the toilet table, I ventured forth.
“The nurse is a foreigner, and Adela was born on the Continent; and, I believe, never left it till within six months ago.
I stopped: the sound ceased, only for an instant; it began again, louder: for at first, though distinct, it was very low.
“A shockingly ugly old creature, miss; almost as black as a crock.”

“Why, she’s a real sorceress!” cried Frederick Lynn.
“You have seen love: have you not?—and, looking forward, you have seen him married, and beheld his bride happy?”

“Humph!
“I do my best; and have done it, and will do it,” was the answer: he shut up the chaise door, and the vehicle drove away.
John does not at all resemble his father, and I am glad of it: John is like me and like my brothers—he is quite a Gibson.
Equality of position and fortune is often advisable in such cases; and there are twenty years of difference in your ages.
I continued also the wish to be with you, and experienced a strange, regretful consciousness of some barrier dividing us.
We entered the quiet and humble temple; the priest waited in his white surplice at the lowly altar, the clerk beside him.
My hopes were all dead—struck with a subtle doom, such as, in one night, fell on all the first-born in the land of Egypt.
I thought of him now—in his room—watching the sunrise; hoping I should soon come to say I would stay with him and be his.
There are great moors behind and on each hand of me; there are waves of mountains far beyond that deep valley at my feet.
I had eaten with relish: the food was good—void of the feverish flavour which had hitherto poisoned what I had swallowed.
The reason of my departure I cannot and ought not to explain: it would be useless, dangerous, and would sound incredible.
I rested my temples on the breast of temptation, and put my neck voluntarily under her yoke of flowers; I tasted her cup.
One day I had come to my studies in lower spirits than usual; the ebb was occasioned by a poignantly felt disappointment.
He addressed me precisely in his ordinary manner, or what had, of late, been his ordinary manner—one scrupulously polite.
Never mind fine clothes and jewels, now: all that is not worth a fillip.”

“The sun has dried up all the rain-drops, sir.
This was worse than before: the youth grew crimson, and clenched his fist, with every appearance of a meditated assault.
Heathcliff gradually fell back into the shelter of the bed, as I spoke; finally sitting down almost concealed behind it.
The Jonah, in my mind, was Mr. Earnshaw; and I shook the handle of his den that I might ascertain if he were yet living.
On a mellow evening in September, I was coming from the garden with a heavy basket of apples which I had been gathering.
Did he dare to strike me when I was down?’

“‘He trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you on the ground,’ I whispered.
Linton, on the contrary, displayed the true courage of a loyal and faithful soul: he trusted God; and God comforted him.
Since early morning she had been busy ordering her own small affairs; and now attired in her new black frock—poor thing!
Miss has wasted too much time on you already: we cannot remain five minutes longer.”

“Yes, yes, we can!” replied Cathy.
He reddened—I saw that by the moonlight—dropped his hand from the latch, and skulked off, a picture of mortified vanity.
The master listened, and he just smiled to himself, and said, ‘If they have been in the marsh, they are out now, Zillah.
She supported him calmly, in appearance; and he fixed on her features his raised eyes that seemed dilating with ecstasy.
I brought him down one evening, the day before yesterday, and just set him in a chair, and never touched him afterwards.
Her father-in-law went up, held the light to Linton’s face, looked at him, and touched him; afterwards he turned to her.
His daughter-in-law, on perceiving him through the window, immediately escaped to the kitchen, so that I remained alone.
He blackened and scowled like a thunder-cloud, and kept his fists resolutely clenched, and his gaze fixed on the ground.
I’d rayther arn my bite an’ my sup wi’ a hammer in th’ road!”

“Now, now, idiot!” interrupted Heathcliff, “cut it short!
When he came, and I requested admittance and tried to open the door, I found it locked; and Heathcliff bid us be damned.
I felt stunned by the awful event; and my memory unavoidably recurred to former times with a sort of oppressive sadness.
“Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.”—St.
The punishment seemed to me in a high degree ignominious, especially for so great a girl—she looked thirteen or upwards.
“I hardly know, sir; I have little experience of them: they are generally thought pleasant things.”

“Generally thought?
Some years after I had broken with the mother, she abandoned her child, and ran away to Italy with a musician or singer.
The confidence he had thought fit to repose in me seemed a tribute to my discretion: I regarded and accepted it as such.
I thought there were excellent materials in him; though for the present they hung together somewhat spoiled and tangled.
Thither I repaired, glad at least to go downstairs; for that brought me, I imagined, nearer to Mr. Rochester’s presence.
The noble bust, the sloping shoulders, the graceful neck, the dark eyes and black ringlets were all there;—but her face?
Miss Ingram placed herself at her leader’s right hand; the other diviners filled the chairs on each side of him and her.
The flame illuminated her hand stretched out: roused now, and on the alert for discoveries, I at once noticed that hand.
CHAPTER XXII
Mr. Rochester had given me but one week’s leave of absence: yet a month elapsed before I quitted Gateshead.
On sped my rainbow, fast as light;
I flew as in a dream;
For glorious rose upon my sight
That child of Shower and Gleam.
“There!” he exclaimed, as he stretched out his hand and bent from the saddle: “You can’t do without me, that is evident.
I forget she knows nothing of the character of that woman, or of the circumstances attending my infernal union with her.
Preconceived opinions, foregone determinations, are all I have at this hour to stand by: there I plant my foot.”

I did.
No sleep was there: the inmate was walking restlessly from wall to wall; and again and again he sighed while I listened.
I would fain at the moment have become bee or lizard, that I might have found fitting nutriment, permanent shelter here.
And then, nobody need to have a quieter death nor he had.”

“You say he never mentioned us?” inquired one of the ladies.
Diana, as she passed in and out, in the course of preparing tea, brought me a little cake, baked on the top of the oven.
This benefit conferred gives you an unlimited claim on my gratitude, and a claim, to a certain extent, on my confidence.
My uncle engaged afterwards in more prosperous undertakings: it appears he realised a fortune of twenty thousand pounds.
He examined my face, I thought, with austerity, as I came near: the traces of tears were doubtless very visible upon it.
I will retain my post of mistress till you get a substitute.”

He smiled approbation: we shook hands, and he took leave.
Diana and Mary will be at home in a week, and I want to have everything in order against their arrival.”

“I understand.
The vehicle had stopped at the wicket; the driver opened the door: first one well-known form, then another, stepped out.
In a minute I had my face under their bonnets, in contact first with Mary’s soft cheek, then with Diana’s flowing curls.
But God sees not as man sees: His will be done—”

He opened the gate, passed through it, and strayed away down the glen.
You do not love him then, Jane?”

“Not as a husband.”

“Yet he is a handsome fellow.”

“And I am so plain, you see, Die.
it was not himself that could now kindle the lustre of animated expression: he was dependent on another for that office!
He wanted to marry me only because he thought I should make a suitable missionary’s wife, which she would not have done.
As he turned aside his face a minute, I saw a tear slide from under the sealed eyelid, and trickle down the manly cheek.
In all England, I do not believe that I could have fixed on a situation so completely removed from the stir of society.
A perfect misanthropist’s Heaven—and Mr. Heathcliff and I are such a suitable pair to divide the desolation between us.
“Ah, certainly—I see now: you are the favoured possessor of the beneficent fairy,” I remarked, turning to my neighbour.
My landlord halloed for me to stop ere I reached the bottom of the garden, and offered to accompany me across the moor.
I got the dishcloth, and rather spitefully scrubbed Edgar’s nose and mouth, affirming it served him right for meddling.
She made no stay at the stairs’-head, but mounted farther, to the garret where Heathcliff was confined, and called him.
At fifteen she was the queen of the country-side; she had no peer; and she did turn out a haughty, headstrong creature!
On the contrary, I shall have great pleasure in sending it to perdition to punish its Maker,” exclaimed the blasphemer.
He’s always, always in my mind: not as a pleasure, any more than I am always a pleasure to myself, but as my own being.
I heard Joseph read on a while afterwards; then I distinguished his slow step on the ladder, and then I dropped asleep.
When I refused to go, and when she found her entreaties did not move me, she went lamenting to her husband and brother.
“Away, away with it!” I replied; “I desire to have—”

“The doctor says you must drop the powders.”

“With all my heart!
Your type is not a lamb, it’s a sucking leveret.”

“I wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, Cathy!” said her friend.
And say what I could, I was incapable of making her comprehend it to be her own; so I rose and covered it with a shawl.
Heathcliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the flesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into his pocket.
Let us see what we can make of it.”

He got up and strode to the door: Hareton and Joseph followed in gaping curiosity.
She wouldn’t dine; but she reappeared at tea, pale, and red about the eyes, and marvellously subdued in outward aspect.
I swear, on my salvation, he’s going to his grave, and none but you can save him!”

The lock gave way and I issued out.
yah muh goa back whear yah coom frough.”

“Joseph!” cried a peevish voice, simultaneously with me, from the inner room.
“But wait, and you shall hear if he conned his A B C to please me; and if it were worth while being civil to the brute.
Zillah and I ascended after him; but he stopped me at the top of the steps, and said I shouldn’t go in: I must go home.
In the morning, Catherine learnt my betrayal of her confidence, and she learnt also that her secret visits were to end.
“I’ve prayed often,” he half soliloquised, “for the approach of what is coming; and now I begin to shrink, and fear it.
“Now,” said he, with curbed ferocity, “I’m getting angry and if you don’t command that paltry spirit of yours—damn you!
It was Zillah; donned in her scarlet shawl, with a black silk bonnet on her head, and a willow-basket swung to her arm.
“No,” he replied; “she’s upstairs: she’s not to go; we won’t let her.”

“You won’t let her, little idiot!” I exclaimed.
I expected such a transformation on raising the lid—but I’m better pleased that it should not commence till I share it.
“Now, mind you don’t talk with and notice your cousin too much,” were my whispered instructions as we entered the room.
“You want a candle to take upstairs: you might have lit one at this fire.”

“No, I don’t wish to go upstairs,” he said.
The bread and cheese was presently brought in and distributed, to the high delight and refreshment of the whole school.
I saw her in a black gown and widow’s cap; frigid, perhaps, but not uncivil: a model of elderly English respectability.
I perceive those pictures were done by one hand: was that hand yours?”

“Yes.”

“And when did you find time to do them?
If I had time, and was not in mortal dread of some prating prig of a servant passing, I would know what all this means.
Seated on the carpet, by the side of this basin, was seen Mr. Rochester, costumed in shawls, with a turban on his head.
In short, I believe you have been trying to draw me out—or in; you have been talking nonsense to make me talk nonsense.
I experienced a strange feeling as the key grated in the lock, and the sound of his retreating step ceased to be heard.
Your influence, sir, is evidently potent with him: he will never set you at defiance or wilfully injure you.”

“Oh, no!
Soon he produced his pocket-book: “Here,” said he, offering me a note; it was fifty pounds, and he owed me but fifteen.
Rochester, I may as well mention another matter of business to you while I have the opportunity.”

“Matter of business?
On Midsummer-eve, Adèle, weary with gathering wild strawberries in Hay Lane half the day, had gone to bed with the sun.
Go on.”

The disquietude of his air, the somewhat apprehensive impatience of his manner, surprised me: but I proceeded.
I was in my own room as usual—just myself, without obvious change: nothing had smitten me, or scathed me, or maimed me.
I only ask you to endure one more night under this roof, Jane; and then, farewell to its miseries and terrors for ever!
Let her identity, her connection with yourself, be buried in oblivion: you are bound to impart them to no living being.
I watched her come—watched with the strangest anticipation; as though some word of doom were to be written on her disk.
To-night, at least, I would be her guest, as I was her child: my mother would lodge me without money and without price.
A pretty little house stood at the top of the lane, with a garden before it, exquisitely neat and brilliantly blooming.
I imagine he did not think I was a beggar, but only an eccentric sort of lady, who had taken a fancy to his brown loaf.
When she left me, I felt comparatively strong and revived: ere long satiety of repose and desire for action stirred me.
“You need be in no hurry to hear,” he said: “let me frankly tell you, I have nothing eligible or profitable to suggest.
The next day a keen wind brought fresh and blinding falls; by twilight the valley was drifted up and almost impassable.
“Jane, come with me to India: come as my helpmeet and fellow-labourer.”

The glen and sky spun round: the hills heaved!
“I before proved to you the absurdity of a single woman of your age proposing to accompany abroad a single man of mine.
I was excited more than I had ever been; and whether what followed was the effect of excitement the reader shall judge.
She was roused, and did—no miracle—but her best.”

I broke from St. John, who had followed, and would have detained me.
I too have some to see and ask after in England, before I depart for ever.”

It wanted yet two hours of breakfast-time.
Perhaps I had too rashly over-leaped conventionalities; and he, like St. John, saw impropriety in my inconsiderateness.
Guests are so exceedingly rare in this house that I and my dogs, I am willing to own, hardly know how to receive them.
“And at the end of it to be flighted to death!” he said, opening his great-coat, which he held bundled up in his arms.
Mr. Hindley had gone from home one afternoon, and Heathcliff presumed to give himself a holiday on the strength of it.
There followed another long pause, during which I perceived a drop or two trickle from Catherine’s cheek to the flags.
And he dreaded that mind: it revolted him: he shrank forebodingly from the idea of committing Isabella to its keeping.
Further reflection suggested this must be Hareton, my Hareton, not altered greatly since I left him, ten months since.
does he know how I’m altered?” continued she, staring at her reflection in a mirror hanging against the opposite wall.
I trembled lest he should send me to call her; but I was spared the pain of being the first proclaimant of her flight.
“My master will be here in half an hour.”

Heathcliff groaned a curse, and strained Catherine closer: she never moved.
He would have risen, and unfixed her fingers by the act—she clung fast, gasping: there was mad resolution in her face.
The master looked asleep, and I ventured soon after sunrise to quit the room and steal out to the pure refreshing air.
But the moment he recollected himself enough to notice me watching, he thundered a command for me to go, and I obeyed.
‘And his mouth watered to tear you with his teeth; because he’s only half man: not so much, and the rest fiend.’

“Mr.
I believe her new abode was in the south, near London; there she had a son born a few months subsequent to her escape.
I began to dislike, more than to compassionate Linton, and to excuse his father in some measure for holding him cheap.
“‘Get to thy own room!’ he said, in a voice almost inarticulate with passion; and his face looked swelled and furious.
“Don’t provoke him against me, Catherine, for he is very hard.”

“Is he severe to you, Master Heathcliff?” I inquired.
Then I said I must go first, and tell of her arrival; imploring her to say, she should be happy with young Heathcliff.
She stared, but soon comprehending why I counselled her to utter the falsehood, she assured me she would not complain.
He bid me be silent; and then, for the first time, allowed himself a glance round the room and a look at the pictures.
Well, I reflected, there was never a pleasanter, or more harmless sight; and it will be a burning shame to scold them.
When Joseph quitted the room he took his seat in the place he generally chose, and I put a basin of coffee before him.
Having uttered these words he left the house, slowly sauntered down the garden path, and disappeared through the gate.
Returning, I had to cross before the looking-glass; my fascinated glance involuntarily explored the depth it revealed.
“I should like to speak to her before I go.”

Bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast-room, and led the way out.
don’t scold.”

The action was more frank and fearless than any I was habituated to indulge in: somehow it pleased her.
Breakfast-time came at last, and this morning the porridge was not burnt; the quality was eatable, the quantity small.
Mr. Rochester lay down on a sofa in a pretty room called the salon, and Sophie and I had little beds in another place.
Having removed this impediment, and lifted certain silvery envelopes of tissue paper, she merely exclaimed—

“Oh ciel!
Something creaked: it was a door ajar; and that door was Mr. Rochester’s, and the smoke rushed in a cloud from thence.
I once, indeed, overheard part of a dialogue between Leah and one of the charwomen, of which Grace formed the subject.
It was drawing to an end now; but the evening was even warm, and I sat at work in the schoolroom with the window open.
All their class held these principles: I supposed, then, they had reasons for holding them such as I could not fathom.
Holding my hand in both his own, he chafed it; gazing on me, at the same time, with the most troubled and dreary look.
Young ladies have a remarkable way of letting you know that they think you a “quiz” without actually saying the words.
“You sent for me,” I said, “and I am here; and it is my intention to stay till I see how you get on.”

“Oh, of course!
Still, when I reached my chamber, I felt a pang at the idea she should even temporarily misconstrue what she had seen.
The wedding is to take place quietly, in the church down below yonder; and then I shall waft you away at once to town.
Yet, after all, as a friend and companion, I hope never to become quite distasteful to my dear master.”

“Distasteful!
I waited now his return; eager to disburthen my mind, and to seek of him the solution of the enigma that perplexed me.
“You did right to hold fast to each other,” I said: as if the monster-splinters were living things, and could hear me.
Rochester, I will love you and live with you through life till death,” and a fount of rapture would spring to my lips.
To-morrow, I trust, I shall get the better of them partially; and in a few weeks, perhaps, they will be quite subdued.
If I get a little thin, it is with anxiety about my prospects, yet unsettled—my departure, continually procrastinated.
When I remembered how far I had once been admitted to his confidence, I could hardly comprehend his present frigidity.
To the main point—the departure with me from England, the co-operation with me in my future labours—you do not object.
I proved it to you in such terms as, I should have thought, would have prevented your ever again alluding to the plan.
The fire broke out at dead of night, and before the engines arrived from Millcote, the building was one mass of flame.
The last mile I performed on foot, having dismissed the chaise and driver with the double remuneration I had promised.
I preferred utter loneliness to the constant attendance of servants; but Jane’s soft ministry will be a perpetual joy.
I did wrong: I would have sullied my innocent flower—breathed guilt on its purity: the Omnipotent snatched it from me.
Himself has hitherto sufficed to the toil, and the toil draws near its close: his glorious sun hastens to its setting.
He promised to bring me a pocketful of apples and pears, and then he kissed his children, said good-bye, and set off.
As an instance, I remember Mr. Earnshaw once bought a couple of colts at the parish fair, and gave the lads each one.
He neither wept nor prayed; he cursed and defied: execrated God and man, and gave himself up to reckless dissipation.
“Nobody coming here, I hope?”

“Not that I know of,” stammered Miss: “but you should be in the field now, Heathcliff.
He had listened till he heard Catherine say it would degrade her to marry him, and then he stayed to hear no further.
Having levelled my palace, don’t erect a hovel and complacently admire your own charity in giving me that for a home.
I’d rather see Edgar at bay than you.”

“Do you suppose I’m going with that blow burning in my gullet?” he thundered.
He looked astonished at the expression my face assumed during a brief second: it was not horror, it was covetousness.
Do you reflect that all those words will be branded in my memory, and eating deeper eternally after you have left me?
He’s rapidly regaining flesh since he lost his better half.”

“Who is it, then, Mr. Kenneth?” I repeated impatiently.
He was unfit for attending to such matters then, but he bid me speak to his lawyer; and at length permitted me to go.
His father remarked the restless glances wandering to the window, and the hand irresolutely extended towards his cap.
In stretching to pull them, her hat fell off; and as the door was locked, she proposed scrambling down to recover it.
And on the first occasion of my sitting up in the evening I asked Catherine to read to me, because my eyes were weak.
It will be very heartless, if you do.”

“I’ll make up my mind on that point by to-morrow, Miss Catherine,” I replied.
Linton lay on the settle, sole tenant, sucking a stick of sugar-candy, and pursuing my movements with apathetic eyes.
He says she hates me and wants me to die, that she may have my money; but she shan’t have it: and she shan’t go home!
I’m come to fetch you home; and I hope you’ll be a dutiful daughter and not encourage my son to further disobedience.
Nay!” she answered, “she doesn’t bide here: shoo’s up at th’ Heights.”

“Are you the housekeeper, then?” I continued.
You should have given us notice!”

“I’ve arranged to be accommodated there, for as long as I shall stay,” I answered.
It contained a bookcase: I soon possessed myself of a volume, taking care that it should be one stored with pictures.
I caught scraps of their conversation, from which I was able only too distinctly to infer the main subject discussed.
My look or something else must have struck her as offensive, for she spoke with extreme though suppressed irritation.
Half-an-hour’s recreation succeeded, then study; then the glass of water and the piece of oat-cake, prayers, and bed.
The teachers then shook hands with me and kissed me, and a murmur of pleasure ran through the ranks of my companions.
We obeyed, as in duty bound; Adèle wanted to take a seat on my knee, but she was ordered to amuse herself with Pilot.
Presently a voice blent with the rich tones of the instrument; it was a lady who sang, and very sweet her notes were.
I stood on the rug and warmed my hands, which were rather cold with sitting at a distance from the drawing-room fire.
Here, Jane, is an arbour; sit down.”

The arbour was an arch in the wall, lined with ivy; it contained a rustic seat.
She had been all animation with the game, and irritated pride did not lower the expression of her haughty lineaments.
There, I had a friend’s face under my gaze; and what did it signify that those young ladies turned their backs on me?
I did not think I should tremble in this way when I saw him, or lose my voice or the power of motion in his presence.
I had prepared an occupation for him; for I was determined not to spend the whole time in a tête-à-tête conversation.
But wide as pathless was the space
That lay our lives between,
And dangerous as the foamy race
Of ocean-surges green.
“The reel of silk has run smoothly enough so far; but I always knew there would come a knot and a puzzle: here it is.
I was dazzled, stimulated: my senses were excited; and being ignorant, raw, and inexperienced, I thought I loved her.
“No,” said she; “we do not keep a servant.”

“Can you tell me where I could get employment of any kind?” I continued.
He had already withdrawn his eye from the Peri, and was looking at a humble tuft of daisies which grew by the wicket.
He wanted to train me to an elevation I could never reach; it racked me hourly to aspire to the standard he uplifted.
To have yielded then would have been an error of principle; to have yielded now would have been an error of judgment.
Yet I knew all the time, if I yielded now, I should not the less be made to repent, some day, of my former rebellion.
“In a few more hours I shall succeed you in that track, cousin,” thought I: “I too have a coach to meet at Whitcross.
Who is this?” he demanded, trying, as it seemed, to see with those sightless eyes—unavailing and distressing attempt!
“My dear master,” I answered, “I am Jane Eyre: I have found you out—I am come back to you.”

“In truth?—in the flesh?
I will abide by your decision.”

“Choose then, sir—her who loves you best.”

“I will at least choose—her I love best.
I had not; I soon asked and obtained leave of Mr. Rochester, to go and see her at the school where he had placed her.
“It is only your guest, sir,” I called out, desirous to spare him the humiliation of exposing his cowardice further.
It seemed a long while to us all—the three days of his absence—and often did little Cathy ask when he would be home.
On my inquiring the subject of his thoughts, he answered gravely—“I’m trying to settle how I shall pay Hindley back.
The long light hair curled slightly on the temples; the eyes were large and serious; the figure almost too graceful.
I obliged her to obey; and I shall never forget what a scene she acted when we reached her chamber: it terrified me.
“It was yourself, Mrs. Linton: you knew it a while since.”

“Myself!” she gasped, “and the clock is striking twelve!
“Did you ever feel a touch of it in your life?”

“Put that down!” he interrupted, perceiving my intention to depart.
You know you lie to say I have killed you: and, Catherine, you know that I could as soon forget you as my existence!
At least, I suppose the weeping was on both sides; as it seemed Heathcliff could weep on a great occasion like this.
He had ceased drinking at a point below irrationality, and had neither stirred nor spoken during two or three hours.
I explained that they were bare masses of stone, with hardly enough earth in their clefts to nourish a stunted tree.
Suppose, for a minute, that master and I were dead, and you were by yourself in the world: how would you feel, then?
I’ve been exceedingly naughty, but I won’t do it any more!”

With a grave severity in my manner I bade her stand up.
At last his cries were choked by a dreadful fit of coughing; blood gushed from his mouth, and he fell on the ground.
Nelly, take him in, and I’ll follow your advice concerning the doctor, without delay.”

“You’ll do well,” replied I.
They brought word that Catherine was ill: too ill to quit her room; and Heathcliff would not suffer them to see her.
I took particular notice of him this time; but then he does his best apparently to make the least of his advantages.
Living among clowns and misanthropists, she probably cannot appreciate a better class of people when she meets them.
He was leaning against the ledge of an open lattice, but not looking out: his face was turned to the interior gloom.
I rose, and went into the garden, as soon as I could see, to ascertain if there were any footmarks under his window.
He gorged himself habitually at table, which made him bilious, and gave him a dim and bleared eye and flabby cheeks.
Georgiana, who had a spoiled temper, a very acrid spite, a captious and insolent carriage, was universally indulged.
As he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket, a loud bell rang for the servants’ dinner; he knew what it was.
“I was shut up in a room where there is a ghost till after dark.”

I saw Mr. Lloyd smile and frown at the same time.
I buried a little child of five years old only a day or two since,—a good little child, whose soul is now in heaven.
After dinner, we immediately adjourned to the schoolroom: lessons recommenced, and were continued till five o’clock.
I devoured my bread and drank my coffee with relish; but I should have been glad of as much more—I was still hungry.
These words fell like the knell of doom—

“All those top-knots must be cut off.”

Miss Temple seemed to remonstrate.
When we got back, it was after moonrise: a pony, which we knew to be the surgeon’s, was standing at the garden door.
Miss Temple was not to be seen: I knew afterwards that she had been called to a delirious patient in the fever-room.
I advanced; then paused by the crib side: my hand was on the curtain, but I preferred speaking before I withdrew it.
——shire was seventy miles nearer London than the remote county where I now resided: that was a recommendation to me.
Mrs. Fairfax said he seldom stayed here longer than a fortnight at a time; and he has now been resident eight weeks.
Their collective appearance had left on me an impression of high-born elegance, such as I had never before received.
Mild Mrs. Dent talked with good-natured Mrs. Eshton; and the two sometimes bestowed a courteous word or smile on me.
It depends on yourself to stretch out your hand, and take it up: but whether you will do so, is the problem I study.
A great moth goes humming by me; it alights on a plant at Mr. Rochester’s foot: he sees it, and bends to examine it.
Her coming was my hope each day,
Her parting was my pain;
The chance that did her steps delay
Was ice in every vein.
A puerile tear dimmed my eye while I looked—a tear of disappointment and impatience; ashamed of it, I wiped it away.
“Give me your confidence, Jane,” he said: “relieve your mind of any weight that oppresses it, by imparting it to me.
I heard you come home that night, Jane, though probably you were not aware that I thought of you or watched for you.
You entered the room with a look and air at once shy and independent: you were quaintly dressed—much as you are now.
I knelt down by him; I turned his face from the cushion to me; I kissed his cheek; I smoothed his hair with my hand.
Much exhausted, and suffering greatly now for want of food, I turned aside into a lane and sat down under the hedge.
If she had held it open a little longer, I believe I should have begged a piece of bread; for I was now brought low.
My little servant, after helping me to clean my house, was gone, well satisfied with the fee of a penny for her aid.
“Very well,” he answered quietly: “and indeed my head is otherwise occupied than with him: I have my tale to finish.
Now the wealth did not weigh on me: now it was not a mere bequest of coin,—it was a legacy of life, hope, enjoyment.
“Humility, Jane,” said he, “is the groundwork of Christian virtues: you say right that you are not fit for the work.
Whether he was incensed or surprised, or what, it was not easy to tell: he could command his countenance thoroughly.
A lover finds his mistress asleep on a mossy bank; he wishes to catch a glimpse of her fair face without waking her.
A sad pity—I must beware how I cause her to regret her choice.” The last reflection may seem conceited; it was not.
Some were detached sentences; other parts took the form of a regular diary, scrawled in an unformed, childish hand.
I guessed, by his preparations, that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hard couch, made a movement to follow him.
And now that we’ve done washing, and combing, and sulking—tell me whether you don’t think yourself rather handsome?
here we are the same as anywhere else, when you get to know us,” observed Mrs. Dean, somewhat puzzled at my speech.
I couldn’t explain to Edgar how certain I felt of having a fit, or going raging mad, if he persisted in teasing me!
I must not write to her, I suppose, and my brother is either too angry or too distressed to answer what I sent him.
“‘Hindley will be there before me,’ I answered: ‘and that’s a poor love of yours that cannot bear a shower of snow!
His books are not as nice as mine, and he wanted to have them extremely, when I told him how interesting they were.
She went sadly on: there was no running or bounding now, though the chill wind might well have tempted her to race.
Her features were so sad, they did not seem hers: she evidently regarded what she had heard as every syllable true.
I thoroughly gauged his disposition from his behaviour, and saw at once it would be folly to attempt humouring him.
Tell the truth about it, Linton; for I musn’t come, if I have hurt you.”

“You must come, to cure me,” he answered.
“I wouldn’t eat or drink here, if I were starving.”

Heathcliff had the key in his hand that remained on the table.
Catherine looked up, and instinctively raised her hand to her cheek: his neighbourhood revived a painful sensation.
I considered it best to depart without seeing Mr. Heathcliff, and bring a rescue for my young lady from the Grange.
Very young he looked: though his actual age was thirty-nine, one would have called him ten years younger, at least.
Fortunately, no thought of worldly affairs crossed the latter’s mind, to disturb him, after his daughter’s arrival.
Sit down and take your dinner with us; a guest that is safe from repeating his visit can generally be made welcome.
but first—”

He ran headlong at me: I felt him grasp my hair and my shoulder: he had closed with a desperate thing.
“Don’t take them off,” I cried; “I will not stir.”

In guarantee whereof, I attached myself to my seat by my hands.
Come to lunch!”

It was Bessie, I knew well enough; but I did not stir; her light step came tripping down the path.
I had meant to be so good, and to do so much at Lowood: to make so many friends, to earn respect and win affection.
Millcote, ——shire; I brushed up my recollections of the map of England; yes, I saw it; both the shire and the town.
I have been green, too, Miss Eyre,—ay, grass green: not a more vernal tint freshens you now than once freshened me.
Till morning dawned I was tossed on a buoyant but unquiet sea, where billows of trouble rolled under surges of joy.
“Elles changent de toilettes,” said Adèle; who, listening attentively, had followed every movement; and she sighed.
she laughed continually; her laugh was satirical, and so was the habitual expression of her arched and haughty lip.
Excitement instantly seized the whole party: a running fire of raillery and jests was proceeding when Sam returned.
“Yet would to God there was an end of all this!” added Mr. Rochester, as he closed and barred the heavy yard-gates.
I hastened before Bessie; I softly opened the door: a shaded light stood on the table, for it was now getting dark.
It would wail in its cradle all night long—not screaming heartily like any other child, but whimpering and moaning.
Take this advice: the first and last I shall offer you; then you will not want me or any one else, happen what may.
Almost every day I asked Mrs. Fairfax if she had yet heard anything decided: her answer was always in the negative.
Are you anything akin to me, do you think, Jane?”

I could risk no sort of answer by this time: my heart was still.
When I did speak, it was only to express an impetuous wish that I had never been born, or never come to Thornfield.
“Communicate your intentions to Mrs. Fairfax, sir: she saw me with you last night in the hall, and she was shocked.
I thought that of all the stately front nothing remained but a shell-like wall, very high and very fragile-looking.
“Such is the sole conjugal embrace I am ever to know—such are the endearments which are to solace my leisure hours!
An unusual—to me—a perfectly new character I suspected was yours: I desired to search it deeper and know it better.
“It is a village school: your scholars will be only poor girls—cottagers’ children—at the best, farmers’ daughters.
He was never married, and had no near kindred but ourselves and one other person, not more closely related than we.
“Oh, I only came home from S——” (she mentioned the name of a large town some twenty miles distant) “this afternoon.
could not stride the drifts so well as I: her legs are not quite so long: so I must e’en leave you to your sorrows.
“And now you recall your promise, and will not go to India at all, I presume?” said he, after a considerable pause.
There was a grass-grown track descending the forest aisle between hoar and knotty shafts and under branched arches.
To be your wife is, for me, to be as happy as I can be on earth.”

“Because you delight in sacrifice.”

“Sacrifice!
“You should not have come out,” she said, rising and reaching from the chimney-piece two of the painted canisters.
“I’ll never let you in, not if you beg for twenty years.”

“It is twenty years,” mourned the voice: “twenty years.
Nothing was stirring except a brindled, grey cat, which crept from the ashes, and saluted me with a querulous mew.
A few words from her, evincing a dislike to Heathcliff, were enough to rouse in him all his old hatred of the boy.
I could fancy a love for life here almost possible; and I was a fixed unbeliever in any love of a year’s standing.
“And the mistress?” I ventured to inquire; “the doctor says she’s—”

“Damn the doctor!” he interrupted, reddening.
“No,” she persisted, grasping the handle; “not yet, Edgar Linton: sit down; you shall not leave me in that temper.
“If I were in heaven, Nelly, I should be extremely miserable.”

“Because you are not fit to go there,” I answered.
My master’s uneasiness experienced a lull, and further circumstances diverted it into another channel for a space.
“She has been talking nonsense the whole evening; but let her have quiet, and proper attendance, and she’ll rally.
Howsiver, t’ maister sall just tum’le o’er them brooken pots; un’ then we’s hear summut; we’s hear how it’s to be.
I daresay she would rather I had seemed all tenderness before you: it wounds her vanity to have the truth exposed.
I’ve got him faster than his scoundrel of a father secured me, and lower; for he takes a pride in his brutishness.
At last, we agreed to try both, as soon as the right weather came; and then we kissed each other and were friends.
You want whipping for bringing us in here at all, with your dastardly puling tricks: and—don’t look so silly, now!
There was the will, however, to hinder that, and my loud protestations against any infringement of its directions.
And his agitation precluded further speech; he advanced hastily to the entrance, where I made way for him to pass.
I had counselled Catherine to dine upstairs; but, as soon as he perceived her vacant seat, he sent me to call her.
Resting my head on Helen’s shoulder, I put my arms round her waist; she drew me to her, and we reposed in silence.
How pretty, to my eyes, did the china cups and bright teapot look, placed on the little round table near the fire!
First she went to see if the hall-door was fastened; having taken the key from the lock, she led the way upstairs.
He is rather peculiar, perhaps: he has travelled a great deal, and seen a great deal of the world, I should think.
All these relics gave to the third storey of Thornfield Hall the aspect of a home of the past: a shrine of memory.
There were days when she was quite silent; but there were others when I could not account for the sounds she made.
A fire was lit in an apartment upstairs, and there I carried our books, and arranged it for the future schoolroom.
“Will you hand Mr. Rochester’s cup?” said Mrs. Fairfax to me; “Adèle might perhaps spill it.”

I did as requested.
I don’t know whether they were entirely of your doing; probably a master aided you?”

“No, indeed!” I interjected.
This was a demoniac laugh—low, suppressed, and deep—uttered, as it seemed, at the very keyhole of my chamber door.
I hastened to drive from my mind the hateful notion I had been conceiving respecting Grace Poole; it disgusted me.
Amidst this sordid scene, sat a man with his clenched hands resting on his knees, and his eyes bent on the ground.
But I liked his physiognomy even less than before: it struck me as being at the same time unsettled and inanimate.
I have observed in books written by men, that period assigned as the farthest to which a husband’s ardour extends.
He might almost be your father.”

“No, indeed, Mrs. Fairfax!” exclaimed I, nettled; “he is nothing like my father!
I dreamed it would be nameless bliss,
As I loved, loved to be;
And to this object did I press
As blind as eagerly.
I dangers dared; I hindrance scorned;
I omens did defy:
Whatever menaced, harassed, warned,
I passed impetuous by.
There was no putting off the day that advanced—the bridal day; and all preparations for its arrival were complete.
Jane!” he said, in such an accent of bitter sadness it thrilled along every nerve I had; “you don’t love me, then?
I longed to be his; I panted to return: it was not too late; I could yet spare him the bitter pang of bereavement.
“What?”

“I was going to say, impassioned: but perhaps you would have misunderstood the word, and been displeased.
Moreover, she is a sweet girl—rather thoughtless; but you would have sufficient thought for both yourself and her.
So much has religion done for me; turning the original materials to the best account; pruning and training nature.
“I shall sully the purity of your floor,” said he, “but you must excuse me for once.” Then he approached the fire.
His sisters were gone to Morton in my stead: I sat reading Schiller; he, deciphering his crabbed Oriental scrolls.
They must have considered I was very careful and timid at first, and that gradually I grew very bold and reckless.
I should not have left him thus, he said, without any means of making my way: I should have told him my intention.
“Perhaps you would rather not sit any longer on my knee, Miss Eyre?” was the next somewhat unexpected observation.
Her position before was sheltered from the light; now, I had a distinct view of her whole figure and countenance.
The less you meddle with him the better.”

“He must have had some ups and downs in life to make him such a churl.
The servants could not bear his tyrannical and evil conduct long: Joseph and I were the only two that would stay.
“Oh, Nelly!” she added petulantly, jerking her head away from my hands, “you’ve combed my hair quite out of curl!
When have I been harsh, tell me?”

“Yesterday,” sobbed Isabella, “and now!”

“Yesterday!” said her sister-in-law.
I’d as soon put that little canary into the park on a winter’s day, as recommend you to bestow your heart on him!
That was my first idea on observing an elf-locked, brown-eyed boy setting his ruddy countenance against the bars.
I cannot say why I felt so wildly wretched: it must have been temporary derangement; for there is scarcely cause.
You know the terms we are on, I see: his danger does not shock you.”

“What has Heathcliff done to you?” I asked.
Are not you bruised, and cut over your chest and shoulders?’

“‘I can’t say,’ he answered, ‘but what do you mean?
Her spirit was high, though not rough, and qualified by a heart sensitive and lively to excess in its affections.
Still, I thought I could detect in his physiognomy a mind owning better qualities than his father ever possessed.
Linton is going to bed; unless you have something particular to say, I’m sure he won’t hear it now,” I continued.
It was half-past six; the family had just finished breakfast: the servant was clearing and wiping down the table.
But you don’t despise me, do you, Miss—?”

“I wish you would say Catherine, or Cathy,” interrupted my young lady.
she did, she did!”

Cathy, beside herself, gave the chair a violent push, and caused him to fall against one arm.
And lucky it is for us that his father took him: the kinder he was treated, the more tedious and selfish he’d be.
he looked frightful; for his thin face and large eyes were wrought into an expression of frantic, powerless fury.
You must obey my father—you must!”

“I must obey my own,” she replied, “and relieve him from this cruel suspense.
That’s fine gratitude, is it not?”

The corner of Linton’s mouth fell, and he took the sugar-candy from his lips.
He’ll be a clever scholar in a few years.”

“And he wants me to sink into a dunce, meantime,” answered Catherine.
“He’ll not obey you, wicked man, any more,” said Catherine; “and he’ll soon detest you as much as I do.”

“Wisht!
Yes, but we are not to conform to nature; I wish these girls to be the children of Grace: and why that abundance?
Thus restrained and simplified, it sounded more credible: I felt as I went on that Miss Temple fully believed me.
But Helen was ill at present: for some weeks she had been removed from my sight to I knew not what room upstairs.
“Shall I have the pleasure of seeing Miss Fairfax to-night?” I asked, when I had partaken of what she offered me.
Unused as I was to strangers, it was rather a trial to appear thus formally summoned in Mr. Rochester’s presence.
To paint them, in short, was to enjoy one of the keenest pleasures I have ever known.”

“That is not saying much.
The room and the house were silent: only now and then the merriment of the billiard-players was heard from above.
As I spoke he gave my wrist a convulsive grip; the smile on his lips froze: apparently a spasm caught his breath.
Nor was it unwarranted: in five minutes more the grating key, the yielding lock, warned me my watch was relieved.
“Does that person want you?” she inquired of Mr. Rochester; and Mr. Rochester turned to see who the “person” was.
Tea ready, I was going to approach the table; but she desired me to sit still, quite in her old peremptory tones.
Have you no sense to devise a system which will make you independent of all efforts, and all wills, but your own?
One was in breaking the promise which I gave my husband to bring you up as my own child; the other—” she stopped.
Hush, now, and wipe your eyes.”

His softened voice announced that he was subdued; so I, in my turn, became calm.
Your pity, my darling, is the suffering mother of love: its anguish is the very natal pang of the divine passion.
I was glad to give her a sufficient sum to set her up in a good line of business, and so get decently rid of her.
My deep love, my wild woe, my frantic prayer, are all nothing to you?”

What unutterable pathos was in his voice!
But I was a human being, and had a human being’s wants: I must not linger where there was nothing to supply them.
“What do you want?” she inquired, in a voice of surprise, as she surveyed me by the light of the candle she held.
“I thank you for the proposal, Mr. Rivers, and I accept it with all my heart.”

“But you comprehend me?” he said.
“He will sacrifice all to his long-framed resolves,” she said: “natural affection and feelings more potent still.
She answered it with a second laugh, and laughter well became her youth, her roses, her dimples, her bright eyes.
It is just the hour when papa most wants company: when the works are closed and he has no business to occupy him.
He could not—he would not—renounce his wild field of mission warfare for the parlours and the peace of Vale Hall.
I learnt so much from himself in an inroad I once, despite his reserve, had the daring to make on his confidence.
“I can guess your feelings,” he said, “but restrain them for a while: I have nearly finished; hear me to the end.
It was a grand boon doubtless; and independence would be glorious—yes, I felt that—that thought swelled my heart.
I looked at the blank wall: it seemed a sky thick with ascending stars,—every one lit me to a purpose or delight.
It kept up a slow fire of indignation and a trembling trouble of grief, which harassed and crushed me altogether.
Had you stayed but a little longer, you would have laid your hand on the Christian’s cross and the angel’s crown.
Diana and Mary Rivers are both married: alternately, once every year, they come to see us, and we go to see them.
No one will thank you for a doze in such a den!”

“What do you mean?” asked Heathcliff, “and what are you doing?
“I’ll walk in the yard till daylight, and then I’ll be off; and you need not dread a repetition of my intrusion.
“Isabella and Edgar Linton talked of calling this afternoon,” she said, at the conclusion of a minute’s silence.
I’m not sure whether he were not at the door this moment.”

“Oh, he couldn’t overhear me at the door!” said she.
He’s noan feared o’ t’ bench o’ judges, norther Paul, nur Peter, nur John, nur Matthew, nor noan on ’em, not he!
For his life he could not avert that excess of emotion: mingled anguish and humiliation overcame him completely.
“Remain where you are, Catherine,” he said; without any anger in his voice, but with much sorrowful despondency.
As she never offered to descend to breakfast next morning, I went to ask whether she would have some carried up.
I wish I were a girl again, half savage and hardy, and free; and laughing at injuries, not maddening under them!
If he loved with all the powers of his puny being, he couldn’t love as much in eighty years as I could in a day.
Let us settle it at once: will you stay here, and am I to fight my way to Catherine over Linton and his footman?
You wouldn’t think that I should cry at anything Joseph could say; but he and Hareton are detestable companions.
The stanchions stood too close to suffer his shoulders to follow, and I smiled, exulting in my fancied security.
It’s well people don’t really rise from their grave, or, last night, she might have witnessed a repulsive scene!
“Now, get my horse,” she said, addressing her unknown kinsman as she would one of the stable-boys at the Grange.
Mine has nothing valuable about it; yet I shall have the merit of making it go as far as such poor stuff can go.
come this moment.”

Vigorous puffs, and a resolute stare into the grate, declared he had no ear for this appeal.
I wish you were my brother.”

“And then you would like me as well as your father?” observed he, more cheerfully.
I wonder how you would like to pass those fearful nights!” And he began to wail aloud, for very pity of himself.
The sound of our informant’s voice directed him to the library; he entered and motioning him out, shut the door.
I brought the last here—and you gathered them, as a magpie gathers silver spoons, for the mere love of stealing!
The consequence was that, perforce, he was condemned to the fireside and tranquillity, till he made it up again.
They would not shut: they seemed to sneer at my attempts; and his parted lips and sharp white teeth sneered too!
I wonder if he read that notion in my face; for, all at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly and strongly.
No; moonlight was still, and this stirred; while I gazed, it glided up to the ceiling and quivered over my head.
I found the mess to consist of indifferent potatoes and strange shreds of rusty meat, mixed and cooked together.
She is severe: she dislikes my faults.”

“And if I were in your place I should dislike her; I should resist her.
Who are your parents?”

“I have none.”

“Nor ever had, I suppose: do you remember them?”

“No.”

“I thought not.
He is not very forgiving: he broke with his family, and now for many years he has led an unsettled kind of life.
You have both sentiments yet to experience: your soul sleeps; the shock is yet to be given which shall waken it.
“I will tell you in your private ear,” replied she, wagging her turban three times with portentous significancy.
Would you like to see her?”

“Surely, colonel,” cried Lady Ingram, “you would not encourage such a low impostor?
“Well, and you want your fortune told?” she said, in a voice as decided as her glance, as harsh as her features.
Mr. Rochester, putting down his candle, said to me, “Wait a minute,” and he went forward to the inner apartment.
Jane, a little water.”

He held out the tiny glass, and I half filled it from the water-bottle on the washstand.
The other was as certainly Georgiana: but not the Georgiana I remembered—the slim and fairy-like girl of eleven.
She continued either delirious or lethargic; and the doctor forbade everything which could painfully excite her.
The communications were renewed from day to day: they always ran on the same theme—herself, her loves, and woes.
I could not lay a finger anywhere but I was pricked; and now I seem to have gathered up a stray lamb in my arms.
When at last she left you, you lapsed at once into deep reverie: you betook yourself slowly to pace the gallery.
How very thin, and how very bloodless!”

“A mere spectre!”

“Is she ill, or only famished?”

“Famished, I think.
You may sit you down in my chair on the hearthstone, if you will.”

She pointed to the rocking-chair: I took it.
Old Mr. Rivers, she said, was a plain man enough, but a gentleman, and of as ancient a family as could be found.
Diana and Mary Rivers became more sad and silent as the day approached for leaving their brother and their home.
The instruments of transfer were drawn out: St. John, Diana, Mary, and I, each became possessed of a competency.
He was silent after I had uttered the last sentence, and I presently risked an upward glance at his countenance.
Think of the task you undertook—one of incessant fatigue, where fatigue kills even the strong, and you are weak.
I recalled that inward sensation I had experienced: for I could recall it, with all its unspeakable strangeness.
How he suddenly and vehemently clasps in both arms the form he dared not, a moment since, touch with his finger!
No need to cower behind a gate-post, indeed!—to peep up at chamber lattices, fearing life was astir behind them!
“Why not, Mr. Rochester?”

“The picture you have just drawn is suggestive of a rather too overwhelming contrast.
I did not like to put my hand into a hireling’s, but it is pleasant to feel it circled by Jane’s little fingers.
‘I’ve understood from Shielders’” (that was the curate, sir) “‘that he lets her grow up in absolute heathenism.
I, as zealous as herself, hurried eagerly home to admire, on my part; though I was very sad for Hindley’s sake.
I’ve had many a laugh at her perplexities and untold troubles, which she vainly strove to hide from my mockery.
Besides, it’s infernal affectation—devilish conceit it is, to cherish our ears—we’re asses enough without them.
Having noticed a slight movement, I turned my head, and saw him rise from the bench, and steal out noiselessly.
Yah mun’n’t drive him out of his heead for nowt!”

“Have you found Heathcliff, you ass?” interrupted Catherine.
You can well afford to indulge their passing whims as long as their business is to anticipate all your desires.
“Ellen,” said he, when I entered, “have you seen your mistress?”

“Yes; she’s in the kitchen, sir,” I answered.
“It was Monday evening,” I replied, “and this is Thursday night, or rather Friday morning, at present.”

“What!
Miss Cathy shrieked and stretched out her arms as soon as she caught her father’s face looking from the window.
He had been out walking in the fields, for his cap was on, and he was calling to Joseph to bring him dry shoes.
Earnshaw had come out to examine the mischief he had caused, and he was then conveying the poor thing upstairs.
It’s just as if it were a task he was compelled to perform—this interview—for fear his father should scold him.
Dear Catherine, my life is in your hands: and you have said you loved me, and if you did, it wouldn’t harm you.
I hate them.”

“I am not afraid of you!” exclaimed Catherine, who could not hear the latter part of his speech.
Why should you wish to force me to do what I’ll willingly do of myself?”

“Let him dare to force you,” I cried.
Zillah has told me something of the way they go on, otherwise I should hardly know who was dead and who living.
“Nobody,” said Zillah, “ever approached her door, except that once, but I; and nobody asked anything about her.
Mr. Heathcliff, who grew more and more disinclined to society, had almost banished Earnshaw from his apartment.
I wish I could annihilate it from the face of the earth.”

“I would not talk so, Mr. Heathcliff,” I interposed.
This explanation will serve to rectify mistakes which may already have been made, and to prevent future errors.
This preparation for bonds, and the additional ignominy it inferred, took a little of the excitement out of me.
I now stood in the empty hall; before me was the breakfast-room door, and I stopped, intimidated and trembling.
I got up, I went to the door; I came back again; I walked to the window, across the room, then close up to her.
don’t say so!”

“Good-bye to Gateshead!” cried I, as we passed through the hall and went out at the front door.
A long grace was said and a hymn sung; then a servant brought in some tea for the teachers, and the meal began.
Would you not be happier if you tried to forget her severity, together with the passionate emotions it excited?
Coming near, I found the door slightly ajar; probably to admit some fresh air into the close abode of sickness.
Nobody knows how many rebellions besides political rebellions ferment in the masses of life which people earth.
I followed, taking care to stand on one side, so that, screened by the curtain, I could see without being seen.
The cavalcade, following the sweep of the drive, quickly turned the angle of the house, and I lost sight of it.
You are sick; because the best of feelings, the highest and the sweetest given to man, keeps far away from you.
But my mind had been running on Grace Poole—that living enigma, that mystery of mysteries, as I considered her.
Now, then, I must see you all back into your rooms; for, till the house is settled, she cannot be looked after.
Eliza would sit half the day sewing, reading, or writing, and scarcely utter a word either to me or her sister.
The other drawings pleased her much, but she called that “an ugly man.” They both seemed surprised at my skill.
My journey seemed tedious—very tedious: fifty miles one day, a night spent at an inn; fifty miles the next day.
He seemed to think it too good for common purposes: it was the real sunshine of feeling—he shed it over me now.
I said—or something in me said for me, and in spite of me—

“Thank you, Mr. Rochester, for your great kindness.
You glowed in the cool moonlight last night, when you mutinied against fate, and claimed your rank as my equal.
Mr. Rochester obliged me to go to a certain silk warehouse: there I was ordered to choose half-a-dozen dresses.
You call her a strange being yourself: from all you know, you have reason so to call her—what did she do to me?
I wanted to see the invisible thing on which, as we went along, he appeared to fasten a glance fierce and fell.
See that she is cared for as her condition demands, and you have done all that God and humanity require of you.
I sought my ideal of a woman amongst English ladies, French countesses, Italian signoras, and German gräfinnen.
The first I chose was Céline Varens—another of those steps which make a man spurn himself when he recalls them.
“I could bend her with my finger and thumb: and what good would it do if I bent, if I uptore, if I crushed her?
A group of more interest appeared near the hearth, sitting still amidst the rosy peace and warmth suffusing it.
Amidst this hush the quartet sped; he replaced the watch, laid the picture down, rose, and stood on the hearth.
Did no one see Mr. Rochester?”

“I suppose not.”

“But they wrote to him?”

“Of course.”

“And what did he say?
This news actually took my breath for a moment: Mr. St. John, whom I had never heard laugh before, laughed now.
He wrote again a few weeks since, to intimate that the heiress was lost, and asking if we knew anything of her.
And try to restrain the disproportionate fervour with which you throw yourself into commonplace home pleasures.
I adhere to my resolution.”

The avalanche had shaken and slid a little forward, but it did not yet crash down.
I, in my stiff-necked rebellion, almost cursed the dispensation: instead of bending to the decree, I defied it.
Diana announced that she would just give me time to get over the honeymoon, and then she would come and see me.
“Ah, your favourites are among these?” I continued, turning to an obscure cushion full of something like cats.
“I don’t want your help,” she snapped; “I can get them for myself.”

“I beg your pardon!” I hastened to reply.
My neighbour struck me as bordering on repulsive; I knew, through experience, that I was tolerably attractive.
For a moment I considered it absurd that I should need such a weapon to gain admittance into my own residence.
“Still you have not told me, Heathcliff, how Catherine is left behind?”

“I told you we laughed,” he answered.
I marvelled much how he, with a mind to correspond with his person, could fancy my idea of Catherine Earnshaw.
“It is your fault, Ellen,” he said; “you should have kept him out of sight: you should have taken him from me!
“There are many things to be considered before that question can be answered properly,” I said, sententiously.
You remember him, I daresay, when he was just such another as that chubby thing: nearly as young and innocent.
My love for Heathcliff resembles the eternal rocks beneath: a source of little visible delight, but necessary.
and, worse than all, the terrible intimation of Kenneth that I need not expect to be out of doors till spring!
At length I resolved on making an excuse to ask if they would have the candles lighted, and I opened the door.
He hesitated, and then snatched it from my hold; as if he fancied I only intended to tempt and disappoint him.
The same question was repeated at dinner and tea; and again on the morrow after, and received the same answer.
Mr. Linton, on his part, spent his time in the library, and did not inquire concerning his wife’s occupations.
I swept it along the carpet, and then memory burst in: my late anguish was swallowed in a paroxysm of despair.
What you touch at present you may have; but my soul will be on that hill top before you lay hands on me again.
A stout, hearty lass like Catherine does not fall ill for a trifle; and that sort of people should not either.
“How should we do?”

“She went of her own accord,” answered the master; “she had a right to go if she pleased.
Meanwhile, the infant ruffian continued sucking; and glowered up at me defyingly, as he slavered into the jug.
“He turns you adrift on the world with surprising alacrity.”

“He is not aware of what I suffer,” she replied.
A book lay spread on the sill before her, and the scarcely perceptible wind fluttered its leaves at intervals.
“Unless you be a fiend, help her first—then you shall speak to me!”

He walked into the parlour, and sat down.
“And nip up the corner of your apron: I’m certain you’ll need it.”

“Not Mr. Heathcliff, surely?” I exclaimed.
Your old friend Hindley,” he replied, “and my wicked gossip: though he’s been too wild for me this long while.
“Correctly,” he remarked, “that fool’s body should be buried at the cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind.
Mr. Linton would take her with him a mile or so outside, on rare occasions; but he trusted her to no one else.
Aunt Isabella sent papa a beautiful lock of his hair; it was lighter than mine—more flaxen, and quite as fine.
“Do you know me?” asked Heathcliff, having satisfied himself that the limbs were all equally frail and feeble.
He’s mistaken, I think; but I guess where he lives: at the farmhouse I visited in coming from Penistone Crags.
If you had it you’d know what it was; but you’ll be comfortably asleep while I’m in agony, and nobody near me.
“I shall lift him on to the settle,” I said, “and he may roll about as he pleases: we can’t stop to watch him.
“‘If you don’t let me in, I’ll kill you!—If you don’t let me in, I’ll kill you!’ he rather shrieked than said.
That proposal, unexpectedly, roused Linton from his lethargy, and threw him into a strange state of agitation.
“You cannot deny that you entered my house of your own accord, in contempt of his injunctions to the contrary.
“He says I’m not to be soft with Catherine: she’s my wife, and it’s shameful that she should wish to leave me.
“But he looked so different from his usual look that I stopped a moment to stare at him.”

“How?” he inquired.
Well, never mind Mr. Green: as to repenting of my injustices, I’ve done no injustice, and I repent of nothing.
I pray God Mrs. Fairfax may not turn out a second Mrs. Reed; but if she does, I am not bound to stay with her!
“I see you are an early riser.” I went up to her, and was received with an affable kiss and shake of the hand.
“Now,” he continued, again addressing me, “I have received the pilgrim—a disguised deity, as I verily believe.
Let her sleep unmolested.”

“Then I will fetch Leah, and wake John and his wife.”

“Not at all: just be still.
People talk of natural sympathies; I have heard of good genii: there are grains of truth in the wildest fable.
“I happened to remark to Mr. Rochester how much Adèle wished to be introduced to the ladies, and he said: ‘Oh!
Dear mama, there, as soon as she got an inkling of the business, found out that it was of an immoral tendency.
He did not insist, which I rather feared he would have done; he allowed me to return quietly to my usual seat.
I was pondering these things, when an incident, and a somewhat unexpected one, broke the thread of my musings.
“I have a curiosity to hear my fortune told: therefore, Sam, order the beldame forward.”

“My darling Blanche!
She knows all about us!” and they sank breathless into the various seats the gentlemen hastened to bring them.
Chance laid them somewhat apart; let them be once approached and bliss results.”

“I don’t understand enigmas.
I told her he was rather an ugly man, but quite a gentleman; and that he treated me kindly, and I was content.
The same hostile roof now again rose before me: my prospects were doubtful yet; and I had yet an aching heart.
It is a happy thing that time quells the longings of vengeance and hushes the promptings of rage and aversion.
Her mind seemed wholly taken up with reminiscences of past gaiety, and aspirations after dissipations to come.
I swear it—and the oath shall be kept.”

“I tell you I must go!” I retorted, roused to something like passion.
and can bear to have my morsel of bread snatched from my lips, and my drop of living water dashed from my cup?
You shall go to a place I have in the south of France: a whitewashed villa on the shores of the Mediterranean.
With that refreshment I could perhaps regain a degree of energy: without it, it would be difficult to proceed.
Why are you so very shy, and so very sombre?” She filled up the hiatus his silence left by a reply of her own.
Reserved people often really need the frank discussion of their sentiments and griefs more than the expansive.
I am a clergyman,” he said; “and the clergy are often appealed to about odd matters.” Again the latch rattled.
St. John was a good man; but I began to feel he had spoken truth of himself when he said he was hard and cold.
It was Christmas week: we took to no settled employment, but spent it in a sort of merry domestic dissipation.
And he proceeded to inform us that his departure from England was now definitively fixed for the ensuing year.
I should not, perhaps, have to make the sacrifice long, as it wanted now barely three months to his departure.
Summer approached; Diana tried to cheer me: she said I looked ill, and wished to accompany me to the sea-side.
“Ask information of the people at the inn; they can give you all you seek: they can solve your doubts at once.
He would have let the house, but could find no tenant, in consequence of its ineligible and insalubrious site.
John made you schoolmistress of Morton before he knew you were his cousin?”

“Yes.”

“You would often see him?
I had half a mind to spend it by my study fire, instead of wading through heath and mud to Wuthering Heights.
“I want you to tell me my way, not to show it: or else to persuade Mr. Heathcliff to give me a guide.”

“Who?
I’m annoyed how I should dream of chattering on at such a rate; and your gruel cold, and you nodding for bed!
They do live more in earnest, more in themselves, and less in surface, change, and frivolous external things.
If I were her I’m certain I should not die: I should get better at the bare sight of it, in spite of Kenneth.
But trouble me with no more secrets: I’ll not promise to keep them.”

“You’ll keep that?” she asked, eagerly.
We excused her, to a certain extent, on the plea of ill-health: she was dwindling and fading before our eyes.
“How can you say I am harsh, you naughty fondling?” cried the mistress, amazed at the unreasonable assertion.
It is deplorable ignorance of his character, child, and nothing else, which makes that dream enter your head.
The nearer I got to the house the more agitated I grew; and on catching sight of it I trembled in every limb.
I would not strike him with my fist, but I’d kick him with my foot, and experience considerable satisfaction.
Taking advantage of his recovered attention, I exclaimed—“I’m tired with my journey, and I want to go to bed!
ye desarve pining fro’ this to Chrustmas, flinging t’ precious gifts o’God under fooit i’ yer flaysome rages!
The only resource left me was to run to a lattice and warn his intended victim of the fate which awaited him.
To my joy, he left us, after giving this judicious counsel, and Hindley stretched himself on the hearthstone.
He began to put questions concerning his new home, and its inhabitants, with greater interest and liveliness.
Now, if it had been Hareton!—Do you know that, twenty times a day, I covet Hareton, with all his degradation?
“Papa!” she exclaimed, after the morning’s salutations, “guess whom I saw yesterday, in my walk on the moors.
As true as I live, he’s dying for you; breaking his heart at your fickleness: not figuratively, but actually.
We took our tea together; and afterwards she lay down on the rug, and told me not to talk, for she was weary.
She selected one of her own favourites, and got forward steadily about an hour; then came frequent questions.
This is nearly yours, only there are clouds; but then they are so soft and mellow: it is nicer than sunshine.
A sad thing it will be for us all, but a blessing for him!”

“How long will he last, do you think?” he asked.
I shall be your father, to-morrow—all the father you’ll have in a few days—and you shall have plenty of that.
She ran to the door immediately, and answered, “Yes.” “Here, then,” he said, opening it, and pulling her out.
“Yes, when I am upstairs,” he answered; “but I can’t walk upstairs now.”

“In what apartment is it?” I asked.
You know I was wild after she died; and eternally, from dawn to dawn, praying her to return to me her spirit!
“How long ago?”

“Three months since: but sit down, and let me take your hat, and I’ll tell you all about it.
Yah may bend to th’ yoak an ye will—I noan used to ’t, and an old man doesn’t sooin get used to new barthens.
What is Lowood Institution?”

“This house where you are come to live.”

“And why do they call it Institution?
“I like this day; I like that sky of steel; I like the sternness and stillness of the world under this frost.
A dream had scarcely approached my ear, when it fled affrighted, scared by a marrow-freezing incident enough.
At least shake hands.”

He held out his hand; I gave him mine: he took it first in one, then in both his own.
I had thought all the rooms at Thornfield beautifully clean and well arranged; but it appears I was mistaken.
I sit in the shade—if any shade there be in this brilliantly-lit apartment; the window-curtain half hides me.
But I was not jealous: or very rarely;—the nature of the pain I suffered could not be explained by that word.
Is there a fire in the library?”

“Yes, ma’am—but she looks such a tinkler.”

“Cease that chatter, blockhead!
He would send for the baby; though I entreated him rather to put it out to nurse and pay for its maintenance.
“Perhaps you had, Miss: but she often talks in this way towards night—in the morning she is calmer.”

I rose.
His last words were balm: they seemed to imply that it imported something to him whether I forgot him or not.
You have just been telling me how much you liked to be conquered, and how pleasant over-persuasion is to you.
“I’ll not stand you an inch in the stead of a seraglio,” I said; “so don’t consider me an equivalent for one.
The record of the marriage will be found in the register of that church—a copy of it is now in my possession.
Mrs. Fairfax may indeed have suspected something, but she could have gained no precise knowledge as to facts.
“I advise you to live sinless, and I wish you to die tranquil.”

“Then you snatch love and innocence from me?
As the wet twilight deepened, I stopped in a solitary bridle-path, which I had been pursuing an hour or more.
I had nowhere seen such faces as theirs: and yet, as I gazed on them, I seemed intimate with every lineament.
He resumed—

“And since I am myself poor and obscure, I can offer you but a service of poverty and obscurity.
I have hired a building for the purpose, with a cottage of two rooms attached to it for the mistress’s house.
It is what I have to look forward to, and to live for.”

After a considerable pause, I said—“And Miss Oliver?
What he suddenly saw on this blank paper, it was impossible for me to tell; but something had caught his eye.
Still some novelty was necessary, to give to their return the piquancy with which I wished it to be invested.
St. John called me to his side to read; in attempting to do this my voice failed me: words were lost in sobs.
The caged eagle, whose gold-ringed eyes cruelty has extinguished, might look as looked that sightless Samson.
My spirits were excited, and with pleasure and ease I talked to him during supper, and for a long time after.
Blind as he was, smiles played over his face, joy dawned on his forehead: his lineaments softened and warmed.
No woman was ever nearer to her mate than I am: ever more absolutely bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh.
He’ll love and hate equally under cover, and esteem it a species of impertinence to be loved or hated again.
On that bleak hill top the earth was hard with a black frost, and the air made me shiver through every limb.
I uttered an expression of disgust, and pushed past him into the yard, running against Earnshaw in my haste.
I was sick exceedingly, and dizzy, and faint; and thus compelled perforce to accept lodgings under his roof.
In a while, I distinguished steps coming up the road, and the light of a lantern glimmered through the gate.
His childhood’s sense of superiority, instilled into him by the favours of old Mr. Earnshaw, was faded away.
I want to cheat my uncomfortable conscience, and be convinced that Heathcliff has no notion of these things.
there’s no use waiting any longer on that foolish boy: he’ll be gone to Gimmerton, and he’ll stay there now.
We’ve braved its ghosts often together, and dared each other to stand among the graves and ask them to come.
Forget your anger, for she’s hard to guide any way but her own.”

“Catherine ill?” he said, hastening to us.
Hereafter, we must be cautious how we vex her.”

“I desire no further advice from you,” answered Mr. Linton.
The chairs were also damaged, many of them severely; and deep indentations deformed the panels of the walls.
I know what he suffers now, for instance, exactly: it is merely a beginning of what he shall suffer, though.
And often, from the side of my eye, I could detect her raising a hand, and brushing something off her cheek.
“Is that you, Miss Linton?” he said, raising his head from the arm of the great chair, in which he reclined.
As to his cousin, she wept with all her might, aghast at the mischief she had done: though she said nothing.
He answered in his vulgar accent, ‘It wouldn’t do mitch hurt if it did;’ and surveyed its legs with a smile.
But he would neither speak to me nor look at me, through a whole hour, Ellen: he has such an unhappy temper.
“Th’ divil’s harried off his soul,” he cried, “and he may hev’ his carcass into t’ bargin, for aught I care!
I would suggest to such doubters certain obvious distinctions; I would remind them of certain simple truths.
He resembles Fielding as an eagle does a vulture: Fielding could stoop on carrion, but Thackeray never does.
My habitual mood of humiliation, self-doubt, forlorn depression, fell damp on the embers of my decaying ire.
“A little, ma’am.”

“And hungry too, no doubt: let her have some supper before she goes to bed, Miss Miller.
If he had but been able to look to a distance, and see how what they call the spirit of the age was tending!
lui dit un de ces rats; parlez!’ She made me lift my hand—so—to remind me to raise my voice at the question.
Adèle and I had now to vacate the library: it would be in daily requisition as a reception-room for callers.
Nature meant me to be, on the whole, a good man, Miss Eyre; one of the better kind, and you see I am not so.
You would say, I should have been superior to circumstances; so I should—so I should; but you see I was not.
She stood there, by that beech-trunk—a hag like one of those who appeared to Macbeth on the heath of Forres.
I cannot tell whether Miss Ingram was a genius, but she was self-conscious—remarkably self-conscious indeed.
I approached him, and said the gentlemen were coming; he nodded: then I looked carefully round and listened.
“Jane, will you have a flower?”

He gathered a half-blown rose, the first on the bush, and offered it to me.
Are you Jane Eyre?”

“I am Jane Eyre.”

“I have had more trouble with that child than any one would believe.
I drew them large; I shaped them well: the eyelashes I traced long and sombre; the irids lustrous and large.
I could not bear to wait in the house for you, especially with this rain and wind.”

“Rain and wind, indeed!
Now, sir, tell me who and what that woman was?”

“The creature of an over-stimulated brain; that is certain.
That was my Indian Messalina’s attribute: rooted disgust at it and her restrained me much, even in pleasure.
I did not know it, even when, on the occasion of Mesrour’s accident, it came up and gravely offered me help.
The soul, fortunately, has an interpreter—often an unconscious, but still a truthful interpreter—in the eye.
And it is you, spirit—with will and energy, and virtue and purity—that I want: not alone your brittle frame.
Not, certainly, that of persons who saw me then for the first time, and who knew nothing about my character.
Don’t shut the door:—oh, don’t, for God’s sake!”

“I must; the rain is driving in—”

“Tell the young ladies.
First, then, tell me what you have been accustomed to do, and what you can do.”

I had now swallowed my tea.
It would probably, as far as St. John was concerned, be a parting for years: it might be a parting for life.
I should doubt his knowing anything at all about Mr. Rochester; it is not in Mr. Rochester he is interested.
It seemed I could hear all that was to come—whatever the disclosures might be—with comparative tranquillity.
As soon as Mary came down I heard the question: “Is Miss Eyre here?” Then: “Which room did you put her into?
Catherine reflected an instant, with knitted brows—she found it needful to smooth the way for an intrusion.
If it be, he deserves flaying alive for not running to welcome me, and for screaming as if I were a goblin.
Every Linton on the face of the earth might melt into nothing before I could consent to forsake Heathcliff.
Meantime, Catherine paced up and down the floor, exclaiming—“I wonder where he is—I wonder where he can be!
Never a day ut yah’re off, but yon cat o’ Linton comes sneaking hither; and Miss Nelly, shoo’s a fine lass!
Yes: I remember her hero had run off, and never been heard of for three years; and the heroine was married.
It is impossible that you can covet the admiration of Heathcliff—that you consider him an agreeable person!
My poor little sister-in-law is breaking her heart by mere contemplation of your physical and moral beauty.
“What is that apathetic being doing?” she demanded, pushing the thick entangled locks from her wasted face.
Exhaustion of body had entirely subdued her spirit: our fiery Catherine was no better than a wailing child.
I’m glad you possess a consolation, for all you had in me is gone.”

“Her mind wanders, sir,” I interposed.
“This is Edgar’s legal nephew,” I reflected—“mine in a manner; I must shake hands, and—yes—I must kiss him.
“Hey, Throttler, lad!” whispered the little wretch, rousing a half-bred bull-dog from its lair in a corner.
Only, Ellen, promise you’ll not mention a syllable of his infamous conversation to my brother or Catherine.
how can I bear it?” was the first sentence he uttered, in a tone that did not seek to disguise his despair.
Forgive me!”

“It is hard to forgive, and to look at those eyes, and feel those wasted hands,” he answered.
I instinctively echoed the words she had uttered a few hours before: “Incomparably beyond and above us all!
You tempt him to wring them, till he forces a cry of humiliation.”

“Quietly as a lamb!” I answered, aloud.
“Papa charged me nothing: he’ll not scold me, Ellen—he’s never cross, like you!”

“Come, come!” I repeated.
And suppose Mr. Linton were spared till he saw sixty, that would be more years than you have counted, Miss.
My question remained so long unanswered, that I thought the old man had grown deaf, and repeated it louder.
Cathy entered by the casement-window of the drawing-room, and glided noiselessly up to where I awaited her.
I’d inform if he were my own son: and it’s felony without benefit of clergy!”

“Silence!” said the ruffian.
But you’re not so thin—you’ve not been so poorly, have you?”

“Your master is a true scoundrel!” I replied.
He’s as bitter as gall at your desertion and its consequences: don’t expect thanks for this noble devotion.
Earnshaw rose, too, and bid her come to the settle, and sit close by the fire: he was sure she was starved.
She has not learnt to manage her affairs yet, and I act for her: there’s nobody else.”

I looked surprised.
Hareton Earnshaw,” she desired me to be her ambassadress, and convey the present to its destined recipient.
It’s yon flaysome, graceless quean, that’s witched our lad, wi’ her bold een and her forrard ways—till—Nay!
It’s unutterably too much for flesh and blood to bear—even mine.”

He solicited the society of no one more.
“Is there a place in this neighbourhood called Thornfield?” I asked of the waiter who answered the summons.
I am afraid you have had a tedious ride; John drives so slowly; you must be cold, come to the fire.”

“Mrs.
It was so like it that I went forward and said—“Pilot,” and the thing got up and came to me and snuffed me.
You would, perhaps, think me rude if I inquired in return whether you are a philanthropist?”

“There again!
“What is it, Adèle?”

“Est-ce que je ne puis pas prendre une seule de ces fleurs magnifiques, mademoiselle?
On closer examination, you detected something in his face that displeased, or rather that failed to please.
What made him seek this quarter of the house at an untimely season, when he should have been asleep in bed?
He moaned so, and looked so weak, wild, and lost, I feared he was dying; and I might not even speak to him.
“I could not spare the money on any account.”

“Little niggard!” said he, “refusing me a pecuniary request!
It was also accompanied by her that I had, nearly nine years ago, walked down the path I was now ascending.
“This very day I shall take you in the carriage to Millcote, and you must choose some dresses for yourself.
I cannot do it.”

But, then, a voice within me averred that I could do it and foretold that I should do it.
I saw that in another moment, and with one impetus of frenzy more, I should be able to do nothing with him.
The look was far worse to resist than the frantic strain: only an idiot, however, would have succumbed now.
There was a heaven—a temporary heaven—in this room for me, if I chose: I had but to go in and to say—

“Mr.
I did not know whether either of these articles would be accepted: probably they would not; but I must try.
I felt sorely urged to weep; but conscious how unseasonable such a manifestation would be, I restrained it.
Solitude would be no solitude—rest no rest—while the vulture, hunger, thus sank beak and talons in my side.
St. John tells me so too; and I see I wor wrang—but I’ve clear a different notion on you now to what I had.
I liked to read what they liked to read: what they enjoyed, delighted me; what they approved, I reverenced.
“Do you consider you have got your reward for a season of exertion?” asked Mr. Rivers, when they were gone.
I had calculated with certainty on this step answering my end: I felt sure it would elicit an early answer.
How can I, a man not yet thirty, take out with me to India a girl of nineteen, unless she be married to me?
I rose from the thanksgiving—took a resolve—and lay down, unscared, enlightened—eager but for the daylight.
There was a young lady, a governess at the Hall, that Mr. Rochester fell in—”

“But the fire,” I suggested.
This was Zillah, the stout housewife; who at length issued forth to inquire into the nature of the uproar.
He got through, and the doctor affirmed it was in a great measure owing to me, and praised me for my care.
“He was in a bad temper, and now you’ve spoilt your visit; and he’ll be flogged: I hate him to be flogged!
“What!” I cried, uncertain whether to regard him as a worldly visitor, and I raised my hands in amazement.
He had grown a tall, athletic, well-formed man; beside whom my master seemed quite slender and youth-like.
Now all is dashed wrong; by the fool’s craving to hear evil of self, that haunts some people like a demon!
Isabella, terrified and repelled, afraid to enter the room, it would be so dreadful to watch Catherine go.
It’s a rough journey, and a sad heart to travel it; and we must pass by Gimmerton Kirk to go that journey!
“My master bid me tell his sister that she must not expect either a letter or a visit from him at present.
“I have run the whole way from Wuthering Heights!” she continued, after a pause; “except where I’ve flown.
He is quieter now than he used to be, if no one provokes him: more sullen and depressed, and less furious.
I dared hardly lift my eyes from the page before me, that melancholy scene so instantly usurped its place.
‘At the Grange, every one knows your sister would have been living now had it not been for Mr. Heathcliff.
One hoped, and the other despaired: they chose their own lots, and were righteously doomed to endure them.
“I’ve gone very near with papa.”

I put on my bonnet and sallied out, thinking nothing more of the matter.
And you want me: you would wish to see me sometimes, really?”

“I told you I did,” he replied impatiently.
I shall have another happy evening, I thought to myself; and what delights me more, my pretty Linton will.
I dare not tell!”

“Oh, well!” said Catherine, with scornful compassion, “keep your secret: I’m no coward.
Are you cherishing the notion that anybody, let alone Miss Catherine Linton, would have you for a husband?
“You shall be sorry to be yourself presently,” said her father-in-law, “if you stand there another minute.
I got the sexton, who was digging Linton’s grave, to remove the earth off her coffin lid, and I opened it.
“Come and see me, Ellen; don’t forget.”

“Take care you do no such thing, Mrs. Dean!” said her new father.
She’s a beauty, it is true; but not an angel.”

Earnshaw surlily bid her remove her things to the kitchen.
“You should be friends with your cousin, Mr. Hareton,” I interrupted, “since she repents of her sauciness.
“It will certainly annoy Mr. Heathcliff, and he’ll be mad at you both.”

“I’m not going to,” she answered.
I could not; though I had been on foot all day, I could not now repose an instant; I was too much excited.
As I was meditating on this discovery, a little girl, followed by her attendant, came running up the lawn.
“Come and speak to the lady who is to teach you, and to make you a clever woman some day.” She approached.
“What a beautiful room!” I exclaimed, as I looked round; for I had never before seen any half so imposing.
Did I break through one of your rings, that you spread that damned ice on the causeway?”

I shook my head.
It is a point difficult to fix where the features and countenance are so much at variance as in your case.
I know I must conceal my sentiments: I must smother hope; I must remember that he cannot care much for me.
Colonel Dent, their spokesman, demanded “the tableau of the whole;” whereupon the curtain again descended.
And this man I bent over—this commonplace, quiet stranger—how had he become involved in the web of horror?
There was a Reed of Gateshead, a magistrate.”

“It is his widow, sir.”

“And what have you to do with her?
How is Mrs. Reed?—Alive still, I hope.”

“Yes, she is alive; and more sensible and collected than she was.
The moon was not yet set, and we were all in shadow: I could scarcely see my master’s face, near as I was.
The rooks cawed, and blither birds sang; but nothing was so merry or so musical as my own rejoicing heart.
He stood between me and every thought of religion, as an eclipse intervenes between man and the broad sun.
Rochester, —— Hotel, London,” on each: I could not persuade myself to affix them, or to have them affixed.
Briggs, Wood, Mason, I invite you all to come up to the house and visit Mrs. Poole’s patient, and my wife!
I want some water.” He heaved a sort of shuddering sigh, and taking me in his arms, carried me downstairs.
“Jane, I will not trouble you with abominable details: some strong words shall express what I have to say.
For a wife I have but the maniac upstairs: as well might you refer me to some corpse in yonder churchyard.
As yet I had not thought; I had only listened, watched, dreaded; now I regained the faculty of reflection.
Night was come, and her planets were risen: a safe, still night: too serene for the companionship of fear.
I rambled round the hamlet, going sometimes to a little distance and returning again, for an hour or more.
T’ pig doesn’t want it.”

The girl emptied the stiffened mould into my hand, and I devoured it ravenously.
Both were fair complexioned and slenderly made; both possessed faces full of distinction and intelligence.
The traces of the bog were removed from it; the creases left by the wet smoothed out: it was quite decent.
“Whatever cannot ye keep yourself for, then?”

“I have kept myself; and, I trust, shall keep myself again.
“She is well named the Rose of the World, indeed!”

“And may I not paint one like it for you?”

“Cui bono?
CHAPTER XXXIV
It was near Christmas by the time all was settled: the season of general holiday approached.
I hope your energies will then once more trouble you with their strength.”

I looked at him with surprise.
“Forgive me the words, St. John; but it is your own fault that I have been roused to speak so unguardedly.
As I said, I shall return from Cambridge in a fortnight: that space, then, is yet left you for reflection.
“I did not mean to laugh at you,” she said; “I could not hinder myself: Heathcliff, shake hands at least!
Mr. Earnshaw, provided he saw him healthy and never heard him cry, was contented, as far as regarded him.
Have you considered how you’ll bear the separation, and how he’ll bear to be quite deserted in the world?
“They are dove’s eyes—angel’s!”

“She’s her brother’s heir, is she not?” he asked, after a brief silence.
She did not know my share in contributing to the disturbance, and I was anxious to keep her in ignorance.
“But why, Mr. Earnshaw?” I did not relish the notion of deliberately fastening myself in with Heathcliff.
Mr. Heathcliff awoke me; he had just come in, and demanded, in his loving manner, what I was doing there?
“There’s a letter for you, Mrs. Linton,” I said, gently inserting it in one hand that rested on her knee.
“Are you possessed with a devil,” he pursued, savagely, “to talk in that manner to me when you are dying?
Go—”

And, aiding the indignant elder with a lift by the arm, he rid the room of him and closed the door.
Then he drew her to him, and asked if she knew why he had concealed Linton’s near neighbourhood from her?
I was at the Heights by half-past six, and generally stayed till half-past eight, and then galloped home.
The old feeling of indulgent tenderness overcame her vexation, and she grew thoroughly moved and alarmed.
I’m going out to seek your horses.”

Our first thought, on his departure, was to force an exit somewhere.
Heathcliff,” I said, after sitting some time mute, “you are not aware that I am an acquaintance of yours?
It was scarcely noon, and I conceived that I might as well pass the night under my own roof as in an inn.
The portions were handed round; those who liked took a draught of the water, the mug being common to all.
While pondering this new idea, I heard the front door open; Mr. Bates came out, and with him was a nurse.
“The men in green all forsook England a hundred years ago,” said I, speaking as seriously as he had done.
Mr. Rowland Rochester was not quite just to Mr. Edward; and perhaps he prejudiced his father against him.
There were but eight; yet, somehow, as they flocked in, they gave the impression of a much larger number.
The ladies, since the gentlemen entered, have become lively as larks; conversation waxes brisk and merry.
They knelt; while Mrs. Dent and Louisa Eshton, dressed also in white, took up their stations behind them.
Other eyes besides mine watched these manifestations of character—watched them closely, keenly, shrewdly.
Sir George Lynn, Colonel Dent, and Mr. Eshton discussed politics, or county affairs, or justice business.
and do my bidding.”

Again Sam vanished; and mystery, animation, expectation rose to full flow once more.
CHAPTER XX
I had forgotten to draw my curtain, which I usually did, and also to let down my window-blind.
A shout of laughter greeted his entrance; noisy at first, and terminating in Grace Poole’s own goblin ha!
But unimpressionable natures are not so soon softened, nor are natural antipathies so readily eradicated.
Mrs. Reed took her hand away, and, turning her face rather from me, she remarked that the night was warm.
I would as soon have been charged with a pauper brat out of a workhouse: but he was weak, naturally weak.
I fear you will compel me to go through a private marriage ceremony, besides that performed at the altar.
Mrs. Fairfax, I saw, approved me: her anxiety on my account vanished; therefore I was certain I did well.
“I have called it insuperable, and I speak advisedly.”

The speaker came forward and leaned on the rails.
When—how—whither, I could not yet discern; but he himself, I doubted not, would hurry me from Thornfield.
He put wine to my lips; I tasted it and revived; then I ate something he offered me, and was soon myself.
There was much sense in your smile: it was very shrewd, and seemed to make light of your own abstraction.
I had already gained the door; but, reader, I walked back—walked back as determinedly as I had retreated.
I dared not offer her the half-worn gloves, the creased handkerchief: besides, I felt it would be absurd.
Again a whitish object gleamed before me: it was a gate—a wicket; it moved on its hinges as I touched it.
A form was near—what form, the pitch-dark night and my enfeebled vision prevented me from distinguishing.
“Come, you must be obedient.” And still holding my hand she made me rise, and led me into the inner room.
“Well, if you are so obstinate, I will leave you; for I dare not stay any longer: the dew begins to fall.
This spectacle of another’s suffering and sacrifice rapt my thoughts from exclusive meditation on my own.
With what feelings I welcomed single trees I knew, and familiar glimpses of meadow and hill between them!
The grim blackness of the stones told by what fate the Hall had fallen—by conflagration: but how kindled?
But if you wish me to love you, could you but see how much I do love you, you would be proud and content.
“I am no better than the old lightning-struck chestnut-tree in Thornfield orchard,” he remarked ere long.
A sensible man ought to find sufficient company in himself.”

“Delightful company!” muttered Heathcliff.
“Oh!” said he, releasing me, “I see that hideous little villain is not Hareton: I beg your pardon, Nell.
Your welcome has put these ideas out of my mind; but beware of meeting me with another aspect next time!
One on ’em ’s a’most getten his finger cut off wi’ hauding t’ other fro’ stickin’ hisseln loike a cawlf.
Heathcliff would as soon lift a finger at you as the king would march his army against a colony of mice.
Now, you shall hear how I have been received in my new home, as I am led to imagine the Heights will be.
I shuddered to be near him, and thought on the servant’s ill-bred moroseness as comparatively agreeable.
Her husband took his stand on the hearthstone, near me, and began to put questions concerning Catherine.
What do you say?”

“I say, Mr. Heathcliff,” I replied, “you must not: you never shall, through my means.
But I don’t care who knows that the passion was wholly on one side: and I never told her a lie about it.
Neither appeared inclined to dine, and, having waited till all was cold on the table, I commenced alone.
They came limping and hanging their heads; and we set out for home, sadly out of sorts, every one of us.
they are just at the corner, by the stand of hives.”

Linton gathered his energies, and left the hearth.
“So,” I exclaimed, “Miss Catherine, you are tolerably far on, it seems: you may well be ashamed of them!
A fine bundle of trash you study in your leisure hours, to be sure: why, it’s good enough to be printed!
He twined himself up to her, as she half knelt by the settle, and converted her shoulder into a support.
It changed to yawning, and stretching, and—

“Ellen, I’m tired.”

“Give over then and talk,” I answered.
We found two in a cupboard, among a heap of old toys, tops, and hoops, and battledores and shuttlecocks.
He patted Minny’s neck, and said she was a bonny beast, and appeared as if he wanted me to speak to him.
I was forced to pass the front windows to get to the court: it was no use trying to conceal my presence.
Papa talks enough of my defects, and shows enough scorn of me, to make it natural I should doubt myself.
I doubt it too much to venture my tranquillity by running into temptation: and then my home is not here.
But you can’t speak to me!”

Then she looked at him; but he would neither open his mouth nor look again.
As to Hareton Earnshaw, if I see him listen to you, I’ll send him seeking his bread where he can get it!
; which interest she exacted every quarter, keeping her accounts in a little book with anxious accuracy.
I answered “Yes,” and was then lifted out; my trunk was handed down, and the coach instantly drove away.
Before the long hour and a half of prayers and Bible-reading was over, I felt ready to perish with cold.
After she had seen him mount his horse and depart, she was about to close the door, but I ran up to her.
While I paced softly on, the last sound I expected to hear in so still a region, a laugh, struck my ear.
Millions are condemned to a stiller doom than mine, and millions are in silent revolt against their lot.
The din was on the causeway: a horse was coming; the windings of the lane yet hid it, but it approached.
Don’t draw that chair farther off, Miss Eyre; sit down exactly where I placed it—if you please, that is.
I believe it was an inspiration rather than a temptation: it was very genial, very soothing—I know that.
Some hated thought seemed to have him in its grip, and to hold him so tightly that he could not advance.
I am afraid,” she continued, “you are not well to-day: you look flushed and feverish.”

“Oh, quite well!
The solo over, a duet followed, and then a glee: a joyous conversational murmur filled up the intervals.
He spoke of his friend’s dislike of the burning heats, the hurricanes, and rainy seasons of that region.
The news so shocked his mother that it brought on an apoplectic attack.”

“And what good can you do her?
She was fast relapsing into stupor; nor did her mind again rally: at twelve o’clock that night she died.
It pains me to be misjudged by so good a woman.”

“Go to your room, and put on your bonnet,” he replied.
To agitate him thus deeply, by a resistance he so abhorred, was cruel: to yield was out of the question.
Did it not seem to you in the least wrong to live in that way, first with one mistress and then another?
The wish to have some strength and some vigour returned to me as soon as I was amongst my fellow-beings.
He pronounced it needless to send for a doctor: nature, he was sure, would manage best, left to herself.
What are you going to do with these gooseberries?” I inquired, as she brought out a basket of the fruit.
It appeared, then, that her father would throw no obstacle in the way of Rosamond’s union with St. John.
CHAPTER XXXIII
When Mr. St. John went, it was beginning to snow; the whirling storm continued all night.
St. John had a book in his hand—it was his unsocial custom to read at meals—he closed it, and looked up.
You have said you will go with me to India: remember—you have said that.”

“Conditionally.”

“Well—well.
She was a big woman, and had long black hair: we could see it streaming against the flames as she stood.
“We must become one flesh without any delay, Jane: there is but the licence to get—then we marry.”

“Mr.
I hemmed once more, and drew closer to the hearth, repeating my comment on the wildness of the evening.
I’ve marked every day.”

“Yes—very foolish: as if I took notice!” replied Catherine, in a peevish tone.
Intelligence of Mr. Hindley’s arrival drove Linton speedily to his horse, and Catherine to her chamber.
There was scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror before we saw that the little wretch was safe.
Every day I grow madder after sending him to heaven!”

“Hush!” said Catherine, shutting the inner door.
“There’s the coachman and the two gardeners; you’ll surely not wait to be thrust into the road by them!
To me, he signified the threatening danger was not so much death, as permanent alienation of intellect.
Love for my life urged a compliance; I stepped over the threshold to wait till the others should enter.
At Wuthering Heights it always sounded on quiet days following a great thaw or a season of steady rain.
Heathcliff had opened the trinket and cast out its contents, replacing them by a black lock of his own.
I can recollect yet how I loved him; and can dimly imagine that I could still be loving him, if—no, no!
I was compelled to attempt it, because I had succeeded in rousing his rage a pitch above his malignity.
But his master or guardian chased the frown by exclaiming—

“You’ll be the favourite among us, Hareton!
The housekeeper and Hareton were invisible; one gone on an errand, and the other at his work, probably.
Do, now and then, ride with her towards the Heights; and let us exchange a few words, in your presence!
send me a kind note to-morrow, and leave to join you anywhere you please, except at Thrushcross Grange.
I shall return home: it is folly dragging you from the hearth-stone, and pretending—what do we pretend?
And there I remained enclosed the whole day, and the whole of the next night; and another, and another.
He cursed to himself, and in a few minutes came out with a lighted candle, and proceeded to their room.
Mr. Heathcliff looked at him a bit, and then silently resumed his breakfast and his interrupted musing.
To pluck the mask from the face of the Pharisee, is not to lift an impious hand to the Crown of Thorns.
I was not quite sure whether they had locked the door; and when I dared move, I got up and went to see.
“And so you’re glad to leave me?”

“Not at all, Bessie; indeed, just now I’m rather sorry.”

“Just now!
Flowers peeped out amongst the leaves; snow-drops, crocuses, purple auriculas, and golden-eyed pansies.
I leave no one to regret me much: I have only a father; and he is lately married, and will not miss me.
which, when first heard, had thrilled me: I heard, too, her eccentric murmurs; stranger than her laugh.
Are you fond of presents?” and he searched my face with eyes that I saw were dark, irate, and piercing.
I cannot deny that I grieved for his grief, whatever that was, and would have given much to assuage it.
As far as person went, she answered point for point, both to my picture and Mrs. Fairfax’s description.
“Oh, I am so sick of the young men of the present day!” exclaimed she, rattling away at the instrument.
It is scarcely fair, sir.”

“Do you forgive me, Jane?”

“I cannot tell till I have thought it all over.
They ran to and fro; they crowded together: some sobbed, some stumbled: the confusion was inextricable.
“Just give me your hand,” he said: “it will not do to risk a fainting fit.”

I put my fingers into his.
This done, he moved with slow step and abstracted air towards a door in the wall bordering the orchard.
Eliza and I went to look at her: Georgiana, who had burst out into loud weeping, said she dared not go.
I am sorry, Janet, but I believe indeed you must.”

This was a blow: but I did not let it prostrate me.
And her clothes, they will wear out: how can she get new ones?”

Mr. Rochester professed to be puzzled.
My future husband was becoming to me my whole world; and more than the world: almost my hope of heaven.
She had two successors: an Italian, Giacinta, and a German, Clara; both considered singularly handsome.
The next day I observed you—myself unseen—for half-an-hour, while you played with Adèle in the gallery.
Birds began singing in brake and copse: birds were faithful to their mates; birds were emblems of love.
The burden must be carried; the want provided for; the suffering endured; the responsibility fulfilled.
Soon I asked her “if there were any dressmaker or plain-workwoman in the village?”

“Yes; two or three.
Having finished my task of gooseberry picking, I asked where the two ladies and their brother were now.
I think it contains a colour-box, pencils, and paper.”

I approached to take it: a welcome gift it was.
The judges chosen were Mr. Oliver and an able lawyer: both coincided in my opinion: I carried my point.
It is not personal, but mental endowments they have given you: you are formed for labour, not for love.
To-morrow, I leave home for Cambridge: I have many friends there to whom I should wish to say farewell.
Diana was a great deal taller than I: she put her hand on my shoulder, and, stooping, examined my face.
Amidst the silence of those solitary roads and desert hills, I heard it approach from a great distance.
It brought to life and light my whole nature: in his presence I thoroughly lived; and he lived in mine.
But I would not be lachrymose: I dashed off the salt drops, and busied myself with preparing breakfast.
We talk, I believe, all day long: to talk to each other is but a more animated and an audible thinking.
“The herd of possessed swine could have had no worse spirits in them than those animals of yours, sir.
and the first who passes the limits I fix shall—I’ll not say what he shall be done to—but, you’ll see!
Both of us were able to look in by standing on the basement, and clinging to the ledge, and we saw—ah!
If he were careless, and uncared for, before Catherine’s absence, he had been ten times more so since.
(Mr. Hindley had given me directions to make a third party in any private visits Linton chose to pay.)
“There, I’ve found it out at last!” cried Hindley, pulling me back by the skin of my neck, like a dog.
I’m afraid the joy is too great to be real!”

She was about to dart off again; but Edgar arrested her.
And stand you aside!”

“What new phase of his character is this?” exclaimed Mrs. Linton, in amazement.
Master, master, our young lady—”

“Hold your noise!” cried I hastily, enraged at her clamorous manner.
Yes, you may kiss me, and cry; and wring out my kisses and tears: they’ll blight you—they’ll damn you.
It’s no use pouting and crying: that won’t repay the trouble I’ve had, scouring the country after you.
Miss Cathy rejected the peace-offering of the terrier, and demanded her own dogs, Charlie and Phoenix.
“I didn’t once think of loving him till—”

“Loving!” cried I, as scornfully as I could utter the word.
I have always gone to his little parlour, since that night; because his father returned the day after.
He’ll think you are tired of waiting on him, and run off for a little amusement,” answered Heathcliff.
He had sold himself to Mr. Heathcliff: that was the cause of his delay in obeying my master’s summons.
I felt perplexed: I didn’t know whether it were not a proper opportunity to offer a bit of admonition.
At intervals, while turning over the leaves of my book, I studied the aspect of that winter afternoon.
The fiend pinning down the thief’s pack behind him, I passed over quickly: it was an object of terror.
So was the black horned thing seated aloof on a rock, surveying a distant crowd surrounding a gallows.
Sitting on a low stool, a few yards from her arm-chair, I examined her figure; I perused her features.
A light shone through the keyhole and from under the door; a profound stillness pervaded the vicinity.
Bessie!” that was all I said; whereat she half laughed, half cried, and we both went into the parlour.
CHAPTER XVII
A week passed, and no news arrived of Mr. Rochester: ten days, and still he did not come.
She approached the basin, and bent over it as if to fill her pitcher; she again lifted it to her head.
Mr. Mason stood near the fire, talking to Colonel and Mrs. Dent, and appeared as merry as any of them.
What a mercy you are shod with velvet, Jane!—a clod-hopping messenger would never do at this juncture.
The information about Mr. John’s death and the manner of it came too suddenly: it brought on a stroke.
I asked Mrs. Fairfax if she had seen him;—yes: she believed he was playing billiards with Miss Ingram.
Bessie sat on the hearth, nursing her last-born, and Robert and his sister played quietly in a corner.
I went, and having found Bessie and despatched her on my errand, I proceeded to take further measures.
Bessie was faithful; but she had her own family to mind, and could only come occasionally to the hall.
“You are quite a stranger to me—where is Bessie?”

“She is at the lodge, aunt.”

“Aunt,” she repeated.
CHAPTER XXIV
As I rose and dressed, I thought over what had happened, and wondered if it were a dream.
“It is Jane Eyre, sir.”

“Soon to be Jane Rochester,” he added: “in four weeks, Janet; not a day more.
Were you jealous, Jane?”

“Never mind, Mr. Rochester: it is in no way interesting to you to know that.
The system thus entered on, I pursued during the whole season of probation; and with the best success.
Step on my boot-toe; give me both hands: mount!”

I obeyed: joy made me agile: I sprang up before him.
A hearty kissing I got for a welcome, and some boastful triumph, which I swallowed as well as I could.
It seemed to say—‘My fine visions are all very well, but I must not forget they are absolutely unreal.
I was at once content and stimulated with what I saw: I liked what I had seen, and wished to see more.
At the door of a cottage I saw a little girl about to throw a mess of cold porridge into a pig trough.
It remained now only to find a hollow where I could lie down, and feel at least hidden, if not secure.
“Is there ony country where they talk i’ that way?” asked the old woman, looking up from her knitting.
I can recall some sensations felt in that interval; but few thoughts framed, and no actions performed.
He said every nerve had been overstrained in some way, and the whole system must sleep torpid a while.
St. John’s eyes, though clear enough in a literal sense, in a figurative one were difficult to fathom.
“The name of the place where, and of the person with whom I lived, is my secret,” I replied concisely.
I was obliged to recall him to a theme which was of necessity one of close and anxious interest to me.
In this brief hour I had learnt more of him than in the whole previous month: yet still he puzzled me.
My duty will be to develop these germs: surely I shall find some happiness in discharging that office.
I was almost in consternation, so little had I expected any guest from the blocked-up vale that night.
Refuse to be my wife, and you limit yourself for ever to a track of selfish ease and barren obscurity.
He was deeply displeased by what had occurred that day; cordiality would not warm, nor tears move him.
His lunatic wife: and you have nothing to do with him: you dare not speak to him or seek his presence.
He broke off acquaintance with all the gentry, and shut himself up like a hermit at the Hall.”

“What!
On that occasion, he again, with a full heart, acknowledged that God had tempered judgment with mercy.
“There’s nobbut t’ missis; and shoo’ll not oppen ’t an ye mak’ yer flaysome dins till neeght.”

“Why?
In the confluence of the multitude, several clubs crossed; blows, aimed at me, fell on other sconces.
The light came from thence; they had not put up the shutters, and the curtains were only half closed.
Isn’t he, Edgar?’

“While they examined me, Cathy came round; she heard the last speech, and laughed.
He leant his two elbows on his knees, and his chin on his hands and remained rapt in dumb meditation.
Doubtless Catherine marked the difference between her friends, as one came in and the other went out.
Oh, these bleak winds and bitter northern skies, and impassable roads, and dilatory country surgeons!
I’ll be back again directly.”

She quitted the apartment; Mr. Edgar inquired, carelessly, who it was.
“You bid him step up,” he said, addressing me; “and, Catherine, try to be glad, without being absurd.
However, it’s over, and I’ll take no revenge on his folly; I can afford to suffer anything hereafter!
He’s not a rough diamond—a pearl-containing oyster of a rustic: he’s a fierce, pitiless, wolfish man.
He says I mun do as I will.”

“And the curate does not teach you to read and write, then?” I pursued.
Now, as soon as he beheld her, his first precaution was to take a sweeping survey of the house-front.
How have I treated you infernally?”

“I seek no revenge on you,” replied Heathcliff, less vehemently.
“I see in you, Nelly,” she continued dreamily, “an aged woman: you have grey hair and bent shoulders.
I performed the duty of a faithful servant in telling you, and I have got a faithful servant’s wages!
Do come to me, Heathcliff.”

In her eagerness she rose and supported herself on the arm of the chair.
‘But I loved Catherine too; and her brother requires attendance, which, for her sake, I shall supply.
That my—” she stopped, and wept outright; upset at the bare notion of relationship with such a clown.
Pausing in her lamentations, she surveyed him with a glance of awe and horror, then burst forth anew.
“A very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and the instant they have returned from a long journey.
The young man had been washing himself, as was visible by the glow on his cheeks and his wetted hair.
But I want to know why it is there.”

Linton giggled: the first appearance of mirth he had exhibited.
He wanted all to lie in an ecstasy of peace; I wanted all to sparkle and dance in a glorious jubilee.
In a month or two, my lad, you’ll be able to pay her back her present tyrannies with a vigorous hand.
“He’s in the court,” he replied, “talking to Doctor Kenneth; who says uncle is dying, truly, at last.
I’ll go out of doors, or anywhere, rather than have your disagreeable voice in my ear!’ said my lady.
At a notice that I could do with her no longer intercepting my light, she removed to the hearthstone.
They preferred taking it out of doors, under the trees, and I set a little table to accommodate them.
I closed the book, which I dared no longer peruse, and put it on the table, beside the untasted tart.
I daresay she is crying because she could not go out with Missis in the carriage,” interposed Bessie.
What a miserable little poltroon had fear, engendered of unjust punishment, made of me in those days!
Everything appeared very stately and imposing to me; but then I was so little accustomed to grandeur.
Besides, the eccentricity of the proceeding was piquant: I felt interested to see how he would go on.
Not three in three thousand raw school-girl-governesses would have answered me as you have just done.
You think all existence lapses in as quiet a flow as that in which your youth has hitherto slid away.
Did I say, a few days since, that I had nothing to do with him but to receive my salary at his hands?
I must dip my hand again and again in the basin of blood and water, and wipe away the trickling gore.
He could not do worse: he ruined his health and his estate amongst the worst men and the worst women.
Well, he is not a ghost; yet every nerve I have is unstrung: for a moment I am beyond my own mastery.
Never had he called me more frequently to his presence; never been kinder to me when there—and, alas!
“Friends always forget those whom fortune forsakes,” I murmured, as I undrew the bolt and passed out.
“When once I had pressed the frail shoulder, something new—a fresh sap and sense—stole into my frame.
As I groped out the door, and knocked at it hesitatingly, I felt that last idea to be a mere chimera.
The parlour was rather a small room, very plainly furnished, yet comfortable, because clean and neat.
Whenever I went out, I heard on all sides cordial salutations, and was welcomed with friendly smiles.
“I have had hard work to get here, I assure you,” he observed, as he warmed his hands over the flame.
I went out and approached him as he stood leaning over the little gate; I spoke to the point at once.
These are certainly her limbs, and these her features; but I cannot be so blest, after all my misery.
It was mournful, indeed, to witness the subjugation of that vigorous spirit to a corporeal infirmity.
In fact, it formed a little closet, and the ledge of a window, which it enclosed, served as a table.
I took my dingy volume by the scroop, and hurled it into the dog-kennel, vowing I hated a good book.
She was rather thin, but young, and fresh-complexioned, and her eyes sparkled as bright as diamonds.
“But, Nelly, if I knocked him down twenty times, that wouldn’t make him less handsome or me more so.
I heard him tell Mr. Hindley: and now she has nothing to keep her, and she’ll be dead before winter.
“I’m sorry for it, Miss Catherine,” was my response; and I proceeded assiduously with my occupation.
I’m certain you don’t.”

“And would Mr. Linton approve of his sister marrying that man?” I inquired.
“Only that brief time?”

“Long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-temper,” observed I.
I felt the terrible news must be told, and I longed to get it over; but how to do it I did not know.
“She lies with a sweet smile on her face; and her latest ideas wandered back to pleasant early days.
He was worked up to forget the fiendish prudence he boasted of, and proceeded to murderous violence.
Hindley stands sentinel with a knife and loaded pistol.’

“‘Let me in by the kitchen door,’ he said.
I’d rather he suffered less, if I might cause his sufferings and he might know that I was the cause.
“No, no,” she replied: “both he and Joseph are off, and I think they won’t return this hour or more.
He’s absorbed in drying his feet, and never looks at her.—Linton!”

“Yes, father,” answered the boy.
“I can’t do with that,” he said; “it’s not high enough.”

Catherine brought another to lay above it.
You’ll be sick, keeping up so long, Ellen.”

“No, no, dear, I’m not tired,” I returned, continually.
He let go, thundering one of his horrid curses, and I galloped home more than half out of my senses.
On the third day I took courage: at least, I couldn’t bear longer suspense, and stole off once more.
And, since then, sometimes more and sometimes less, I’ve been the sport of that intolerable torture!
Recollect, or I’ll pull your hair!”

“Contrary, then,” answered another, in deep but softened tones.
Owing to an accident at the commencement of March, he became for some days a fixture in the kitchen.
The entire world is a dreadful collection of memoranda that she did exist, and that I have lost her!
You are afraid of ghosts?”

“Of Mr. Reed’s ghost I am: he died in that room, and was laid out there.
Mrs. Reed and I were left alone: some minutes passed in silence; she was sewing, I was watching her.
We set out cold, we arrived at church colder: during the morning service we became almost paralysed.
When thus alone, I not unfrequently heard Grace Poole’s laugh: the same peal, the same low, slow ha!
“You must just stand on one side,” he answered as he rose, first to his knees, and then to his feet.
Was he so very fond of his brother as to be still inconsolable for his loss?”

“Why, no—perhaps not.
It was a pity: if she could but have been proved to resemble him, he would have thought more of her.
It is near four:—in two hours the servants will be up.”

“Good-night, then, sir,” said I, departing.
You repeated to yourself this morning the brief scene of last night?—Cover your face and be ashamed!
“Miss Ingram is mine, of course,” said he: afterwards he named the two Misses Eshton, and Mrs. Dent.
“Why can she not influence him more, when she is privileged to draw so near to him?” I asked myself.
“No,” she continued, “it is in the face: on the forehead, about the eyes, in the lines of the mouth.
Ladies, keep off, or I shall wax dangerous.”

And dangerous he looked: his black eyes darted sparks.
Ever since I have known Mason, I have only had to say to him ‘Do that,’ and the thing has been done.
You never told me that before: you always said you had no relations.”

“None that would own me, sir.
Three times a day she studied a little book, which I found, on inspection, was a Common Prayer Book.
“Because I disliked you too fixedly and thoroughly ever to lend a hand in lifting you to prosperity.
You wandered out of the fold to seek your shepherd, did you, Jane?”

“I wanted you: but don’t boast.
After some minutes’ silence, he continued, cheerily—

“Now, Janet, I’ll explain to you all about it.
Come all of you—follow!”

Still holding me fast, he left the church: the three gentlemen came after.
Mr. Rochester then turned to the spectators: he looked at them with a smile both acrid and desolate.
You will forget me before I forget you.”

“You make me a liar by such language: you sully my honour.
Life, however, was yet in my possession, with all its requirements, and pains, and responsibilities.
“I’ll give you a piece of bread,” she said, after a pause; “but we can’t take in a vagrant to lodge.
You should not be roving about now; it looks very ill.”

“But where shall I go if you drive me away?
CHAPTER XXIX
The recollection of about three days and nights succeeding this is very dim in my mind.
He might well be a little shocked at the irregularity of my lineaments, his own being so harmonious.
I was weakly dismayed at the ignorance, the poverty, the coarseness of all I heard and saw round me.
Before two years passed, the rash pair were both dead, and laid quietly side by side under one slab.
In the very meridian of the night’s enjoyment, about an hour after tea, a rap was heard at the door.
such an immense quantity of valuable property destroyed: hardly any of the furniture could be saved.
He checked the water on its way to his lips, and seemed to listen: he drank, and put the glass down.
I should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold, for my convenience, on such a night,” I cried.
He was relentless in worrying him about his soul’s concerns, and about ruling his children rigidly.
“Have you been looking for him, as I ordered?”

“I sud more likker look for th’ horse,” he replied.
“Well, Miss!” I exclaimed, touching her shoulder; “you are not bent on getting your death, are you?
Is he turning out a bit of a hypocrite, and coming into the country to work mischief under a cloak?
“He might spare himself the trouble,” said Heathcliff: “I could do as well without his approbation.
And, Nelly, say to Edgar, if you see him again to-night, that I’m in danger of being seriously ill.
“You are one of those things that are ever found when least wanted, and when you are wanted, never!
How can I?”

They were silent—their faces hid against each other, and washed by each other’s tears.
It might have wailed out of life, and nobody cared a morsel, during those first hours of existence.
We redeemed the neglect afterwards; but its beginning was as friendless as its end is likely to be.
Till she reached the age of thirteen she had not once been beyond the range of the park by herself.
“Tell Mr. Heathcliff,” he answered calmly, “that his son shall come to Wuthering Heights to-morrow.
Cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or, at least, hunting out the nests of the grouse.
Her appointed companion did not pretend to escort her: he shied off by the road-side, and vanished.
I’ve questioned him twice now, and each time he looked so stupid I think he does not understand me.
It is wearisome, to a stirring active body: but few have slighter reasons for complaint than I had.
CHAPTER XXV
“These things happened last winter, sir,” said Mrs. Dean; “hardly more than a year ago.
I thought you wouldn’t come.”

“Why won’t you be candid?” cried Catherine, swallowing her greeting.
I remember stopping to kick the breath out of him, and then hurrying upstairs, to my room and hers.
When I would have given my life for one kind word, even to see one of your faces, you all kept off.
He had been content with daily labour and rough animal enjoyments, till Catherine crossed his path.
“Let me take that pipe,” she said, cautiously advancing her hand and abstracting it from his mouth.
Do you know where the wicked go after death?”

“They go to hell,” was my ready and orthodox answer.
It seemed as if an invisible bond had burst, and that I had struggled out into unhoped-for liberty.
Would you like to drink some water?”

“No, Mrs. Reed.”

“Is there anything else you wish for, Jane?
Helen heard me patiently to the end: I expected she would then make a remark, but she said nothing.
I saw by her look she wished no longer to talk to me, but rather to converse with her own thoughts.
Are you going home?”

“Yes; to my long home—my last home.”

“No, no, Helen!” I stopped, distressed.
“Arithmetic, you see, is useful; without its aid, I should hardly have been able to guess your age.
“I am glad I ordered dinner an hour after the time Mr. Rochester mentioned; for it is past six now.
Not liking to sit in the cold and darkness, I thought I would lie down on my bed, dressed as I was.
The gaping wound of my wrongs, too, was now quite healed; and the flame of resentment extinguished.
and how the recollection of childhood’s terrors and sorrows revived as I traced its harsh line now!
“I dreamt another dream, sir: that Thornfield Hall was a dreary ruin, the retreat of bats and owls.
He could have settled her with a well-planted blow; but he would not strike: he would only wrestle.
“Yes, sir.”

“Then tell me so roundly and sharply—don’t spare me.”

“I cannot: I am tired and sick.
“‘This life,’ said I at last, ‘is hell: this is the air—those are the sounds of the bottomless pit!
To tell me that I had already a wife is empty mockery: you know now that I had but a hideous demon.
And what a distortion in your judgment, what a perversity in your ideas, is proved by your conduct!
I might be questioned: I could give no answer but what would sound incredible and excite suspicion.
I could not hope to get a lodging under a roof, and sought it in the wood I have before alluded to.
I’m fear’d you have some ill plans agate, that bring you about folk’s houses at this time o’ night.
I soon withdrew, for I had talked as much, and sat up as long, as my present strength would permit.
In a few days I had so far recovered my health that I could sit up all day, and walk out sometimes.
It was by his advice that my father risked most of his property in the speculation that ruined him.
The sketch of Rosamond’s portrait pleased him highly: he said I must make a finished picture of it.
No one would take me for love; and I will not be regarded in the light of a mere money speculation.
Perhaps you think I had forgotten Mr. Rochester, reader, amidst these changes of place and fortune.
do you not go to India?”

“You said I could not unless I married you.”

“And you will not marry me!
I stayed my step, almost my breath, and stood to watch him—to examine him, myself unseen, and alas!
The tray shook as I held it; the water spilt from the glass; my heart struck my ribs loud and fast.
What do you mean, Jane?”

“My uncle in Madeira is dead, and he left me five thousand pounds.”

“Ah!
she looked very well, and very handsome; yet, I think, not very happy.”

“Oh dear, I don’t wonder!
“An unfeeling child,” I thought to myself; “how lightly she dismisses her old playmate’s troubles.
He cunningly conjectured they were staying away in order to avoid hearing his protracted blessing.
“She’s ill,” said Hindley, taking her wrist; “I suppose that’s the reason she would not go to bed.
Pray, don’t imagine that he conceals depths of benevolence and affection beneath a stern exterior!
I will have it back; and I’ll have his gold too; and then his blood; and hell shall have his soul!
“Hareton, thou willn’t sup thy porridge to-neeght; they’ll be naught but lumps as big as my neive.
You know as well as I do, that for every thought she spends on Linton she spends a thousand on me!
He was christened Linton, and, from the first, she reported him to be an ailing, peevish creature.
Hareton’s blood would be required at his hands; and there lay immense consolation in that thought.
This pleased him, for he was not much better: he dried his eyes, and lightened into a faint smile.
“I don’t know,” she replied, casting a longing look to the door, and evidently eager to be active.
Not one in a hundred would weep at losing a relation they had just seen twice, for two afternoons.
you have got them,” she commenced immediately, dropping on her knees, when we were enclosed alone.
“‘I’m ill to-night, Catherine, love,’ he said; ‘and you must have all the talk, and let me listen.
Ech, ech, ech!’

“‘Where must we go?’ I asked of my cousin, disregarding the old wretch’s mockery.
If papa thought I had left him on purpose, and if he died before I returned, could I bear to live?
Zillah, Zillah!”

“No, no; sit you down, my good mistress,” she replied; “you’re right sickly yet.
She heard the men I sent disputing at the door, and she gathered the sense of Heathcliff’s answer.
But I’m glad I’ve a better, to forgive it; and I know he loves me, and for that reason I love him.
“‘I’ve been starved a month and more,’ she answered, resting on the word as scornful as she could.
“And listen,” she continued, provokingly, commencing a verse of an old ballad in the same fashion.
That sounds as if I had been labouring the whole time only to exhibit a fine trait of magnanimity.
He moves me differently: and yet if I could do it without seeming insane, I’d never see him again!
Through the whole night, and far into the morning, we heard him groaning and murmuring to himself.
Why did they send me so far and so lonely,
    Up where the moors spread and grey rocks are piled?
“Ay, ay!” was the answer: the door was slapped to, a voice exclaimed “All right,” and on we drove.
The meal over, prayers were read by Miss Miller, and the classes filed off, two and two, upstairs.
you have never cleaned your nails this morning!”

Burns made no answer: I wondered at her silence.
I have again and again intimated that I desire the hair to be arranged closely, modestly, plainly.
It was as if a martyr, a hero, had passed a slave or victim, and imparted strength in the transit.
I obeyed him, and walked down to the traveller, by this time struggling himself free of his steed.
I was in the mood for being useful, or at least officious, I think, for I now drew near him again.
I hastened to Mrs. Fairfax’s room; there was a fire there too, but no candle, and no Mrs. Fairfax.
Soon after they were gone he rang the bell: a message came that I and Adèle were to go downstairs.
When fate wronged me, I had not the wisdom to remain cool: I turned desperate; then I degenerated.
She was returning: of course my heart thumped with impatience against the iron rails I leant upon.
Lifting his eye to its battlements, he cast over them a glare such as I never saw before or since.
Still she had her merits; and I was disposed to appreciate all that was good in her to the utmost.
Yet I had not forgotten his faults; indeed, I could not, for he brought them frequently before me.
I will account for this state of affairs” (pointing to the bed): “and now return to your own room.
You should have seen the dining-room that day—how richly it was decorated, how brilliantly lit up!
But you eat nothing: you have scarcely tasted since you began tea.”

“No: I am too thirsty to eat.
Mr. Rochester had been absent upwards of a fortnight, when the post brought Mrs. Fairfax a letter.
It is too soon for her to give up business.”

“She is a good hand, I daresay,” said the charwoman.
I rose and curtseyed to them: one or two bent their heads in return, the others only stared at me.
Henry and Frederick Lynn are very dashing sparks indeed; and Colonel Dent is a fine soldierly man.
“I wonder with what feelings you came to me to-night,” she said, when she had examined me a while.
But, as I was saying: sitting in that window-seat, do you think of nothing but your future school?
This day fortnight you’ll hardly be a pin the worse of it: you’ve lost a little blood; that’s all.
It is not a thing to be used indiscriminately, but it is good upon occasion: as now, for instance.
“Come, Jane—come hither.”

“Your bride stands between us.”

He rose, and with a stride reached me.
I considered it a very natural and necessary one: he had talked of his future wife dying with him.
Stay till he comes, reader; and, when I disclose my secret to him, you shall share the confidence.
Am I leaving you without a tear—without a kiss—without a word?”

“Not yet.”

“Am I about to do it?
Oh, I have no respect for myself when I think of that act!—an agony of inward contempt masters me.
Any enjoyment that bordered on riot seemed to approach me to her and her vices, and I eschewed it.
“Why are you silent, Jane?”

I was experiencing an ordeal: a hand of fiery iron grasped my vitals.
The more solitary, the more friendless, the more unsustained I am, the more I will respect myself.
“Never,” said he, as he ground his teeth, “never was anything at once so frail and so indomitable.
Once more I took off my handkerchief—once more I thought of the cakes of bread in the little shop.
To be sure, what I begged was employment; but whose business was it to provide me with employment?
CHAPTER XXXII
I continued the labours of the village-school as actively and faithfully as I could.
She generally came at the hour when Mr. Rivers was engaged in giving his daily catechising lesson.
There is this difference between me and deistic philosophers: I believe; and I believe the Gospel.
From the wild stringy root of human uprightness, she has reared a due sense of the Divine justice.
And what opiate for his severe sufferings—what object for his strong passions—had he sought there?
I trust, Jane, you are in earnest when you say you will serve your heart to God: it is all I want.
And yet the spectacle of desolation I had just left prepared me in a measure for a tale of misery.
“Yes, ma’am; I lived there once.”

“Did you?” Not in my time, I thought: you are a stranger to me.
There was none: all was interwoven stem, columnar trunk, dense summer foliage—no opening anywhere.
You are come back to me then?”

“I am.”

“And you do not lie dead in some ditch under some stream?
Ferndean is buried, as you see, in a heavy wood, where sound falls dull, and dies unreverberating.
She was not a gossip, I feared; unless about her own affairs, and those could hardly interest me.
I did wish Mr. Heathcliff would remove here, and then we might have been together again.”

“What!
She seemed almost over-fond of Mr. Linton; and even to his sister she showed plenty of affection.
He leant against the side, and held his fingers on the latch as if intending to open for himself.
Go, and say some person from Gimmerton desires to see her.”

“How will she take it?” I exclaimed.
It vanished in a twinkling; but immediately I felt an irresistible yearning to be at the Heights.
Meantime, thank you for telling me your sister-in-law’s secret: I swear I’ll make the most of it.
The tyrant grinds down his slaves and they don’t turn against him; they crush those beneath them.
“That’s a turkey’s,” she murmured to herself; “and this is a wild duck’s; and this is a pigeon’s.
But, being in disgrace, I was not favoured with a description of the interesting objects she saw.
“And I never knew such a fainthearted creature,” added the woman; “nor one so careful of hisseln.
Heathcliff rose, and went into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard, calling out for Hareton.
“Catherine, why are you crying, love?” I asked, approaching and putting my arm over her shoulder.
Catherine quelled her lamentations also, took a seat opposite, and looked solemnly into the fire.
“You should have opened a lattice and called out: but I could swear that chit is glad you didn’t.
you’ve tired me—go away, go away!” And he turned his face on to his arm, and shut his eyes again.
My first interview with her grieved and shocked me: she had altered so much since our separation.
But he would not come near it; and so I informed her in the morning, to her great disappointment.
That evening calm betrayed alike the tinkle of the nearest streams, the sough of the most remote.
Mrs. Fairfax seemed to think it necessary that some one should be amiable, and she began to talk.
Mr. Rochester continued—

“Adèle showed me some sketches this morning, which she said were yours.
She was gratified: there it stood, a little carton, on the table when we entered the dining-room.
He bent his head a little towards me, and with a single hasty glance seemed to dive into my eyes.
I hurried on my frock and a shawl; I withdrew the bolt and opened the door with a trembling hand.
If he liked the majestic, she was the very type of majesty: then she was accomplished, sprightly.
What tricks Theodore and I used to play on our Miss Wilsons, and Mrs. Greys, and Madame Jouberts!
A ceremony followed, in dumb show, in which it was easy to recognise the pantomime of a marriage.
It was a comfort; but, indeed, I had been on my guard almost from the beginning of the interview.
Presently I heard Pilot bark far below, out of his distant kennel in the courtyard: hope revived.
The sun will soon rise, and I must have him off.”

“Directly, sir; the shoulder is just bandaged.
You thought you were as dead as a herring two hours since, and you are all alive and talking now.
One morning I fell to sketching a face: what sort of a face it was to be, I did not care or know.
Now act as you please: write and contradict my assertion—expose my falsehood as soon as you like.
“My bride is here,” he said, again drawing me to him, “because my equal is here, and my likeness.
I loved him very much—more than I could trust myself to say—more than words had power to express.
For some time after I went to bed, I could not sleep—a sense of anxious excitement distressed me.
I stumbled over an obstacle: my head was still dizzy, my sight was dim, and my limbs were feeble.
Every atom of your flesh is as dear to me as my own: in pain and sickness it would still be dear.
I was wrong to attempt to deceive you; but I feared a stubbornness that exists in your character.
One drear word comprised my intolerable duty—“Depart!”

“Jane, you understand what I want of you?
I folded my shawl double, and spread it over me for a coverlet; a low, mossy swell was my pillow.
I could not bear to return to the sordid village, where, besides, no prospect of aid was visible.
Her face was near mine: I saw there was pity in it, and I felt sympathy in her hurried breathing.
Diana took the word—

“Do you mean,” she asked, “that we have now given you what aid you require?
“Do you mean to say,” he asked, “that you are completely isolated from every connection?”

“I do.
“You shall,” repeated Mary, in the tone of undemonstrative sincerity which seemed natural to her.
The heart was thrilled, the mind astonished, by the power of the preacher: neither were softened.
What, with the largest portion of your mind—sentiments—tastes?”

“Save them till they are wanted.
I have been too abrupt in communicating the news; it has excited you beyond your strength.”

“Mr.
All the house was still; for I believe all, except St. John and myself, were now retired to rest.
I seemed to penetrate very near a Mighty Spirit; and my soul rushed out in gratitude at His feet.
He stopped at my door: I feared he would knock—no, but a slip of paper was passed under the door.
He took the way over the misty moors in the direction of Whitcross—there he would meet the coach.
Or what does it mean?”

“St John was only twenty-nine, sir.”

“‘Jeune encore,’ as the French say.
My Edward and I, then, are happy: and the more so, because those we most love are happy likewise.
“I don’t think it possible for me to get home now without a guide,” I could not help exclaiming.
They’ll be covered if left in the fold all night: and put a plank before them,” said Heathcliff.
After behaving as badly as possible all day, she sometimes came fondling to make it up at night.
She began singing very low, till his fingers dropped from hers, and his head sank on his breast.
I shall not bear it!” And he would have broken from the circle, but Miss Cathy seized him again.
The insulted visitor moved to the spot where he had laid his hat, pale and with a quivering lip.
It makes a dog fiercer, and I love something fierce—get me a scissors—something fierce and trim!
Then I put her through the following catechism: for a girl of twenty-two it was not injudicious.
He is not altogether guiltless in this illness of mine; and that I had a great mind to tell him.
Two words would comprehend my future—death and hell: existence, after losing her, would be hell.
Yet I was a fool to fancy for a moment that she valued Edgar Linton’s attachment more than mine.
It asserted its own tranquillity, which seemed a pledge of equal quiet to its former inhabitant.
I’ll not stay here!”

Then the latch was raised and fell: they did not suffer him to come forth.
“Can you tell?”

“Your son?” she said, having doubtfully surveyed, first one and then the other.
Be off, and entertain her as nicely as you can.”

He watched the couple walking past the window.
CHAPTER XXIV
At the close of three weeks I was able to quit my chamber and move about the house.
Perceiving me immovable, she essayed another method of showing her disrelish for her occupation.
The surprise petrified her an instant: she uttered an inarticulate exclamation, and stood fixed.
I give you what I have: the present is hardly worth accepting; but I have nothing else to offer.
I felt disgusted at the little wretch’s composure, since he was no longer in terror for himself.
He needn’t have raised that tale: it shall all be laid bare!”

“What do you mean?” asked Zillah.
When I went from home I hastened to return; she must be somewhere at the Heights, I was certain!
How far is it from this?”

“Happen fourteen mile o’er th’ hills; and a rough road,” he answered.
“I know why Hareton never speaks, when I am in the kitchen,” she exclaimed, on another occasion.
I shall envy no one on their wedding day: there won’t be a happier woman than myself in England!
Afterwards she turned, and recommenced her nonsense; at last, Hareton uttered a smothered laugh.
She may thrust you into the coal-hole for anything I care.”

“It’s noan Nelly!” answered Joseph.
Close by Miss Temple’s bed, and half covered with its white curtains, there stood a little crib.
“I am the governess.”

“Ah, the governess!” he repeated; “deuce take me, if I had not forgotten!
My cherished preserver, good-night!”

Strange energy was in his voice, strange fire in his look.
Leah made her appearance; but it was only to intimate that tea was ready in Mrs. Fairfax’s room.
However, to please her, I allowed Sophie to apparel her in one of her short, full muslin frocks.
As if loveliness were not the special prerogative of woman—her legitimate appanage and heritage!
Is that wrong, Jane?”

I answered him by assuming it: to refuse would, I felt, have been unwise.
Better not give you all now: you would, perhaps, stay away three months if you had fifty pounds.
To so practised and indefatigable a horseman as Mr. Rochester, it would be but a morning’s ride.
It was all right: at present I decidedly preferred these fierce favours to anything more tender.
This is you, who have been as slippery as an eel this last month, and as thorny as a briar-rose?
Bertha Mason is mad; and she came of a mad family; idiots and maniacs through three generations!
The sufferings of this mortal state will leave me with the heavy flesh that now cumbers my soul.
It is the clergyman’s function to help—at least with advice—those who wished to help themselves.
I watched to see whether it would spread: but no; as it did not diminish, so it did not enlarge.
These details were just to me what they were to them—so many pure and sweet sources of pleasure.
In a week, Mr. Rivers and Hannah repaired to the parsonage: and so the old grange was abandoned.
Who is it like?”

Mastering some hesitation, he answered, “Miss Oliver, I presume.”

“Of course.
“It is like!” he murmured; “the eye is well managed: the colour, light, expression, are perfect.
The humanities and amenities of life had no attraction for him—its peaceful enjoyments no charm.
He seemed in communion with the genius of the haunt: with his eye he bade farewell to something.
And how will the interval between leaving England for India, and India for the grave, be filled?
“I see you and St. John have been quarrelling, Jane,” said Diana, “during your walk on the moor.
He answered emphatically but calmly—

“A female curate, who is not my wife, would never suit me.
I cannot give you up to perdition as a vessel of wrath: repent—resolve, while there is yet time.
I was almost as hard beset by him now as I had been once before, in a different way, by another.
But a queer thing happened a year since—a very queer thing.”

I feared now to hear my own story.
The servants say they never saw anybody so much in love as he was: he was after her continually.
I wanted to tease you a little to make you less sad: I thought anger would be better than grief.
‘Where are you?’ seemed spoken amongst mountains; for I heard a hill-sent echo repeat the words.
The hook was soldered into the staple: a circumstance observed by me when awake, but forgotten.
Hindley lifted her from her horse, exclaiming delightedly, “Why, Cathy, you are quite a beauty!
“Excuse me,” I responded; “you, my good friend, are a striking evidence against that assertion.
Much against my inclination, I was persuaded to leave Wuthering Heights and accompany her here.
Heathcliff had not the habit of bestowing a single unnecessary civility on Miss Linton, I knew.
She ate and drank eagerly, and sank back on her pillow again, clenching her hands and groaning.
“Has he fallen into a lethargy, or is he dead?”

“Neither,” replied I; “if you mean Mr. Linton.
As soon as ever I had barred the door, utter blackness overwhelmed me, and I fell on the floor.
An oath, and a threat to set Throttler on me if I did not “frame off” rewarded my perseverance.
Tell your master, Nelly, that I never, in all my life, met with such an abject thing as she is.
“‘You’d better seek shelter somewhere else to-night!’ I exclaimed, in rather a triumphant tone.
“Your mother, perhaps, thought you would want to be with him if she mentioned him often to you.
“Miss Cathy,” I interrupted, “it will be three hours instead of one that we are out, presently.
I hadn’t skill to counteract the effect his account had produced: it was just what he intended.
“Your mother hated your father: now then.”

“Oh!” exclaimed Catherine, too enraged to continue.
He glanced fearfully towards the Heights, begging she would remain another half-hour, at least.
I never want to hear, or read, or think of them again!”

“I won’t have them now,” she answered.
bring the things in: where are you?”

Catherine reappeared, bearing a tray of knives and forks.
If you enter the kirkyard, you’ll read, on his headstone, only that, and the date of his death.
Hareton was anxious to enter; but I bid him fetch Mr. Kenneth, and he should go in and see him.
Earnshaw and I, the sexton, and six men to carry the coffin, comprehended the whole attendance.
There is no merit in such goodness.”

“A great deal: you are good to those who are good to you.
I now ventured to descend: it was deep dusk; I retired into a corner and sat down on the floor.
She averred they were a mystery to herself, and that what she knew was chiefly from conjecture.
My position, Miss Eyre, with my back to the fire, and my face to the room, favours observation.
Have you plotted to drown me?”

“I will fetch you a candle, sir; and, in Heaven’s name, get up.
Still it was not late; he often sent for me at seven and eight o’clock, and it was yet but six.
There was nothing to cool or banish love in these circumstances, though much to create despair.
“I cannot possibly countenance any such inconsistent proceeding,” chimed in the Dowager Ingram.
I did not wait to be ordered back to mine, but retreated unnoticed, as unnoticed I had left it.
Mr. Rochester put the now bloody sponge into my hand, and I proceeded to use it as he had done.
Now, doctor, I shall take the liberty of administering a dose myself, on my own responsibility.
How he died, God knows!—they say he killed himself.”

I was silent: the tidings were frightful.
“I think I had better leave her now,” said I to Bessie, who stood on the other side of the bed.
Nothing was said of the master’s marriage, and I saw no preparation going on for such an event.
Sometimes I half fall asleep when I am sitting alone and fancy things that have never happened.
Now, can you tell me whether it is actually true that Mr. Rochester has asked you to marry him?
My love has sworn, with sealing kiss,
With me to live—to die;
I have at last my nameless bliss.
I impressed it on my heart, that it might remain there to serve me as aid in the time of trial.
I wondered what you thought of me, or if you ever thought of me, and resolved to find this out.
At the bottom of its one street there was a little shop with some cakes of bread in the window.
The conclusions drawn from this scrutiny he partially expressed in his succeeding observations.
I doubted I had taken a step which sank instead of raising me in the scale of social existence.
It had slipped my memory that you have good reasons to be indisposed for joining in my chatter.
Some time elapsed before, with all my efforts, I could comprehend my scholars and their nature.
I found it a large, handsome residence, showing abundant evidences of wealth in the proprietor.
I recalled his singular conduct of yesterday, and really I began to fear his wits were touched.
And then this money came only to me: not to me and a rejoicing family, but to my isolated self.
Can I bear the consciousness that every endearment he bestows is a sacrifice made on principle?
You have already as good as put your hand to the plough: you are too consistent to withdraw it.
“Formerly,” I answered, “because you did not love me; now, I reply, because you almost hate me.
I told him to forbear question or remark; I desired him to leave me: I must and would be alone.
He had the advice of an eminent oculist; and he eventually recovered the sight of that one eye.
Mr. Heathcliff followed, his accidental merriment expiring quickly in his habitual moroseness.
Well, say I promise I won’t speak: but that does not bind me not to laugh at him!”

Poor soul!
The master’s bad ways and bad companions formed a pretty example for Catherine and Heathcliff.
Is he injured anywhere?”

“Injured!” I cried angrily; “if he is not killed, he’ll be an idiot!
How sweetly he smiles in his sleep!”

“Yes; and how sweetly his father curses in his solitude!
I’m starving!” And her teeth chattered as she shrank closer to the almost extinguished embers.
I mused: I had a presentiment in the bottom of my heart that he had better have remained away.
They had a smart battle, before their owners could separate them: that formed an introduction.
He had been greatly tried, during the journey, I felt convinced, by his fretful ailing charge.
We really must go back.”

“No, that man is not my son,” answered Heathcliff, pushing me aside.
“Well, Linton,” murmured Catherine, when his corrugated brow relaxed, “are you glad to see me?
I’d not care that Heathcliff gained his ends, and triumphed in robbing me of my last blessing!
keep by me, Catherine; give me your hand.”

“Take mine,” said his father; “stand on your feet.
“I winked,” he answered: “I wink to see my father strike a dog or a horse, he does it so hard.
I stood outside the chamber-door a quarter of an hour, and hardly ventured near the bed, then.
Make haste and get ready, now; and don’t oblige me to compel you.”

“I shall,” said Catherine.
‘He’d take it very kind—he’d be much obliged.’

“She frowned; and looking up, answered—

“‘Mr.
Stop, you have had nothing to eat, have you?”

“I want nothing: I have ordered supper at home.
One night, after the family were in bed, I heard him go downstairs, and out at the front door.
But you might as well bid a man struggling in the water rest within arms’ length of the shore!
You must have forgotten the contents of the book, and you may not have space to search it now.
These things and deeds are diametrically opposed: they are as distinct as is vice from virtue.
Madam Mope!” cried the voice of John Reed; then he paused: he found the room apparently empty.
This portion was rebuilt A.D. ——, by Naomi Brocklehurst,
of Brocklehurst Hall, in this county.
He scrutinised the reverse of these living medals some five minutes, then pronounced sentence.
And now I felt that it was not enough; I tired of the routine of eight years in one afternoon.
I then proposed to occupy myself till dinner-time in drawing some little sketches for her use.
I rang the bell, for I wanted a candle; and I wanted, too, to get an account of this visitant.
I wished I had kept my candle burning: the night was drearily dark; my spirits were depressed.
“I hope it is he,” thought I, “and not something worse.”

He re-entered, pale and very gloomy.
“Now is my time to slip away,” thought I: but the tones that then severed the air arrested me.
Have you no present interest in any of the company who occupy the sofas and chairs before you?
I know she considers the Rochester estate eligible to the last degree; though (God pardon me!)
This wound was not done with a knife: there have been teeth here!”

“She bit me,” he murmured.
Now for the eyes: I had left them to the last, because they required the most careful working.
“With that searching and yet faithful and generous look, you torture me!”

“How can I do that?
“I will run down to the gates: it is moonlight at intervals; I can see a good way on the road.
I wondered why moralists call this world a dreary wilderness: for me it blossomed like a rose.
“You are going, Jane?”

“I am going, sir.”

“You are leaving me?”

“Yes.”

“You will not come?
No reflection was to be allowed now: not one glance was to be cast back; not even one forward.
In what way could it possibly be the interest of the inhabitants of that dwelling to serve me?
The old-fashioned chairs were very bright, and the walnut-wood table was like a looking-glass.
It is right, noble, Christian: yet it breaks my heart!” And the tears gushed to her fine eyes.
“She likes you, I am sure,” said I, as I stood behind his chair, “and her father respects you.
I resumed—

“Your mother was my father’s sister?”

“Yes.”

“My aunt, consequently?”

He bowed.
But, in my opinion, if I am not formed for love, it follows that I am not formed for marriage.
It was easy to make my further arrangements; for I was troubled with no inquiries—no surmises.
At last the woods rose; the rookery clustered dark; a loud cawing broke the morning stillness.
But when he complied, I scarcely knew how to begin; such horror had I of the possible answers.
Fully assured by these words that Mr. Edward—my Mr. Rochester (God bless him, wherever he was!
Since he was not in the grave, I could bear, I thought, to learn that he was at the Antipodes.
They said Mr. Edward had brought her from abroad, and some believed she had been his mistress.
Dusk as it was, I had recognised him—it was my master, Edward Fairfax Rochester, and no other.
He loves (as he can love, and that is not as you love) a beautiful young lady called Rosamond.
“Hearken, hearken, shoo’s cursing on ’em!” muttered Joseph, towards whom I had been steering.
They were of the most curious character: odd transgressions that I never imagined previously.
Her affection tired very soon, however, and when she grew peevish, Hindley became tyrannical.
He managed to continue work till nine o’clock, and then marched dumb and dour to his chamber.
They were hungry after their ride, and easily consoled, since no real harm had befallen them.
You’re to nurse it, Nelly: to feed it with sugar and milk, and take care of it day and night.
I did not marvel how Catherine Earnshaw could forget her first friend for such an individual.
“You love Mr. Edgar because he is handsome, and young, and cheerful, and rich, and loves you.
“Nelly, do you never dream queer dreams?” she said, suddenly, after some minutes’ reflection.
I dreamt once that I was there.”

“I tell you I won’t hearken to your dreams, Miss Catherine!
About midnight, while we still sat up, the storm came rattling over the Heights in full fury.
“What ails you, Cathy?” he was saying when I entered: “you look as dismal as a drowned whelp.
“If I war yah, maister, I’d just slam t’ boards i’ their faces all on ’em, gentle and simple!
Shall I tell him to come up?”

“Here,” he said, “into the parlour?”

“Where else?” she asked.
Mrs. Linton eyed him with a droll expression—half angry, half laughing at his fastidiousness.
“There’s a tigress!” exclaimed Mrs. Linton, setting her free, and shaking her hand with pain.
Edgar, you—you leave me!”

She rang the bell till it broke with a twang; I entered leisurely.
And they have all turned to enemies in a few hours: they have, I’m positive; the people here.
It wanted to get to its nest, for the clouds had touched the swells, and it felt rain coming.
I’ve been told I might leave him before; and I’ve made the attempt, but I dare not repeat it!
Pulling out the nerves with red hot pincers requires more coolness than knocking on the head.
Mr. Linton was a magistrate, and though he had fifty wives dead, he should inquire into this.
I’d rather have a ballad, though: begin.”

Catherine repeated the longest she could remember.
I was afraid for a moment, and I let one volume fall; he kicked it after me, and shut us out.
He lay on the heath, awaiting our approach, and did not rise till we came within a few yards.
“You recollect the two days we agreed to spend in the place and way each thought pleasantest?
“In his crossest humours, formerly, I liked him better than I do in his present curious mood.
She grudged each moment that did not find her bending over his pillow, or seated by his side.
However I disapproved, I couldn’t hinder her: indeed, how could she have refused him herself?
He’ll undertake to torture any number of cats, if their teeth be drawn and their claws pared.
None could have noticed the exact minute of his death, it was so entirely without a struggle.
The minute after, she had sidled to him, and was sticking primroses in his plate of porridge.
He returned after midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut himself into the room beneath.
“Be sure and take good care of her,” cried she to the guard, as he lifted me into the inside.
is requested to send references, name, address, and all particulars to the direction:—

“Mrs.
My faculties, roused by the change of scene, the new field offered to hope, seemed all astir.
I understood her very well, for I had been accustomed to the fluent tongue of Madame Pierrot.
“Monsieur, John has just been to say that your agent has called and wishes to see you.”

“Ah!
Surely I should not be wholly disappointed to-night, when I had so many things to say to him!
“I can make nothing of such a hand as that; almost without lines: besides, what is in a palm?
“Now, I’ve another errand for you,” said my untiring master; “you must away to my room again.
His head was not strong: the knaves he lived amongst fooled him beyond anything I ever heard.
The nightingale’s song was then the only voice of the hour: in listening to it, I again wept.
The cards of address alone remained to nail on: they lay, four little squares, in the drawer.
I heard him go as I stood at the half-open door of my own room, to which I had now withdrawn.
I looked up—I was supported by Mr. Rochester, who sat in a chair across my chamber threshold.
Clara was honest and quiet; but heavy, mindless, and unimpressible: not one whit to my taste.
I was weeping wildly as I walked along my solitary way: fast, fast I went like one delirious.
I took no note of the lapse of time—of the change from morning to noon, from noon to evening.
Only my damp and bemired apparel; in which I had slept on the ground and fallen in the marsh.
He did not speak to me one word, nor even direct to me one glance, till his sisters returned.
I think, moreover, that Nature was not to him that treasury of delight it was to his sisters.
Incommunicative as he was, some time elapsed before I had an opportunity of gauging his mind.
Of course, she knew her power: indeed, he did not, because he could not, conceal it from her.
Those who had saved my life, whom, till this hour, I had loved barrenly, I could now benefit.
Having felt in him the presence of these qualities, I felt his imperfection and took courage.
“Down superstition!” I commented, as that spectre rose up black by the black yew at the gate.
She then proceeded to fill a glass with water, and place it on a tray, together with candles.
I don’t remember another that I can at all compare with it since I was capable of suffering.
However, in my dream, Jabez had a full and attentive congregation; and he preached—good God!
Old Mr. and Mrs. Linton were not there; Edgar and his sisters had it entirely to themselves.
She slipped her fork to the floor, and hastily dived under the cloth to conceal her emotion.
And, truly, it appeared as if the lad were possessed of something diabolical at that period.
“Who, then?”

“Heathcliff.”

“I asked if he liked Mr. Heathcliff.”

“Ay!” he answered again.
The next time Heathcliff came my young lady chanced to be feeding some pigeons in the court.
I told him the cause of my staying up so late—that he had the key of our room in his pocket.
Heathcliff, if I were you, I’d go stretch myself over her grave and die like a faithful dog.
His lawyer had been Earnshaw’s also: I called at the village, and asked him to accompany me.
I don’t engage to let Hareton go undisputed; but I’ll be pretty sure to make the other come!
The master was too gloomy to seek companionship with any people, good or bad; and he is yet.
“Miss Catherine, as the ninny calls her, will discover his value, and send him to the devil.
He pines for kindness, as well as love; and a kind word from you would be his best medicine.
“You know you have been doing wrong, or you wouldn’t be driven to uttering an untruth to me.
He wouldn’t: there was no pleasure in it, he said; but he consented to play at ball with me.
He’ll not harm you: why are you so afraid?”

“I can never re-enter that house,” he answered.
The place was filled with sunshine, and the door stood wide open; but nobody seemed at hand.
She told me that her anguish had at last spurred Linton to incur the risk of liberating her.
Her accomplice suffered for his share in the escape, notwithstanding his timid contrivances.
The cut bled, the pain was sharp: my terror had passed its climax; other feelings succeeded.
I lingered till the sun went down amongst the trees, and sank crimson and clear behind them.
That sounds blasphemous.”

“I disliked Mr. Brocklehurst; and I was not alone in the feeling.
‘Il faut que je l’essaie!’ cried she, ‘et à l’instant même!’ and she rushed out of the room.
“You must want your tea,” said the good lady, as I joined her; “you ate so little at dinner.
I remember you very well: you used to give me a ride sometimes on Miss Georgiana’s bay pony.
“Well, Jane?” he said, as he rested his back against the schoolroom door, which he had shut.
Who may she be that sends for people to see her that distance?”

“Her name is Reed, sir—Mrs.
She generally lies in a kind of lethargy all the afternoon, and wakes up about six or seven.
Do you remember what you said of Céline Varens?—of the diamonds, the cashmeres you gave her?
Mr. Mason, astonished and distressed as you may suppose, revealed the real state of matters.
The honeymoon over, I learned my mistake; she was only mad, and shut up in a lunatic asylum.
“To England, then, I conveyed her; a fearful voyage I had with such a monster in the vessel.
or who will be injured by what you do?”

Still indomitable was the reply—“I care for myself.
I could go back and be his comforter—his pride; his redeemer from misery, perhaps from ruin.
Seeing a respectably-dressed person, a lady as she supposed, she came forward with civility.
They discovered I could draw: their pencils and colour-boxes were immediately at my service.
I know it is ignoble: a mere fever of the flesh: not, I declare, the convulsion of the soul.
“He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.
And, reader, do you think I feared him in his blind ferocity?—if you do, you little know me.
He put out his hand with a quick gesture, but not seeing where I stood, he did not touch me.
I had a belief she loved me even when she left me: that was an atom of sweet in much bitter.
Has anybody hurt you?”

“There, there, children—to your seats!” cried Hindley, bustling in.
Mr. Earnshaw carved bountiful platefuls, and the mistress made them merry with lively talk.
It was not the thorn bending to the honeysuckles, but the honeysuckles embracing the thorn.
Heathcliff dropped his slight hand, and stood looking at him coolly till he chose to speak.
“I shall not be able to believe that I have seen, and touched, and spoken to you once more.
If that creature knew how bitter, he’d be ashamed to cloud its removal with idle petulance.
But it’s a deed to be reserved for a forlorn hope; I’d not take Linton by surprise with it.
And I told him how she had resolved, previous to his coming, on exhibiting a fit of frenzy.
and how the blacksmith’s lass had got up to spy who they were: she knew them both directly.
He snatched the pistol back, jealously; shut the knife, and returned it to its concealment.
The fourth was Sunday, and I brought it into her room after the family were gone to church.
Mrs. Linton’s glance followed him suspiciously: every movement woke a new sentiment in her.
And,” added she musingly, “the thing that irks me most is this shattered prison, after all.
I heard my master mounting the stairs—the cold sweat ran from my forehead: I was horrified.
One might doubt in seasons of cold reflection; but not then, in the presence of her corpse.
Still, he didn’t molest her: for which forbearance she might thank his aversion, I suppose.
Have you ever been here in your life before?”

“Put that hat on, and home at once,” said I.
“Have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere about, not even a rabbit or a weasel’s nest?
She emptied her blackened pieces into the flames, and motioned me to finish the immolation.
And I’ll never—never—oh, never, while I have my senses, do an act or say a word to vex him.
“I didn’t strike you!” muttered Cathy, chewing her lip to prevent another burst of emotion.
But should Linton be unworthy—only a feeble tool to his father—I cannot abandon her to him!
“Yes,” she answered; “because he always made such a great deal of his sufferings, you know.
Mr. Heathcliff, perceiving us all confounded, rose, and expeditiously made the tea himself.
I have a strong faith in ghosts: I have a conviction that they can, and do, exist among us!
The six men departed when they had let it down into the grave: we stayed to see it covered.
Men are hard-hearted, and kind angels only
    Watch o’er the steps of a poor orphan child.
“The child is very young to be sent alone,” said she, putting her candle down on the table.
I ate what I could, and wondered within myself whether every day’s fare would be like this.
During these eight years my life was uniform: but not unhappy, because it was not inactive.
The car stopped at the front door; it was opened by a maid-servant; I alighted and went in.
She seems waiting to be sought; but she will not wait too long: she herself selects a mate.
Mr. Rochester, now sing, and I will play for you.”

“I am all obedience,” was the response.
I got this cordial at Rome, of an Italian charlatan—a fellow you would have kicked, Carter.
The inanimate objects were not changed; but the living things had altered past recognition.
“You might have spared yourself the trouble of delivering that tirade,” answered Georgiana.
I have but a field or two to traverse, and then I shall cross the road and reach the gates.
As for you,—you’d forget me.”

“That I never should, sir: you know—” Impossible to proceed.
When we were again alone, I stirred the fire, and then took a low seat at my master’s knee.
And yet where was the Jane Eyre of yesterday?—where was her life?—where were her prospects?
He had been walking fast about the room, and he stopped, as if suddenly rooted to one spot.
But, Jane, I see by your face you are not forming a very favourable opinion of me just now.
I feared early instilled prejudice: I wanted to have you safe before hazarding confidences.
come, Jane, come!”

As he said this, he released me from his clutch, and only looked at me.
He would feel himself forsaken; his love rejected: he would suffer; perhaps grow desperate.
I have no relative but the universal mother, Nature: I will seek her breast and ask repose.
Meantime, the afternoon advanced, while I thus wandered about like a lost and starving dog.
“She will fall: let her sit.”

And indeed my head swam: I dropped, but a chair received me.
I wish we may be able to benefit her permanently.”

“That is hardly likely,” was the reply.
I have dismissed, with the fee of an orange, the little orphan who serves me as a handmaid.
A very different sort of mind was hers from that, for instance, of the sisters of St. John.
All about me was spotless and bright—scoured floor, polished grate, and well-rubbed chairs.
“You have taken my confidence by storm,” he continued, “and now it is much at your service.
It’s the worst road to travel after dark that can be: there’s no track at all over the bog.
For the evening reading before prayers, he selected the twenty-first chapter of Revelation.
He suddenly seemed to arouse himself: the conviction of the reality of all this seized him.
Now I’ll leave you: I have been travelling these last three days, and I believe I am tired.
I tried to jump up; but could not stir a limb; and so yelled aloud, in a frenzy of fright.
“And I pray that he may break your neck: take him, and be damned, you beggarly interloper!
I threw a shawl over my head and ran to prevent them from waking Mr. Earnshaw by knocking.
“You needn’t have touched me!” he answered, following her eye and snatching away his hand.
But the doctor says missis must go: he says she’s been in a consumption these many months.
She never had power to conceal her passion, it always set her whole complexion in a blaze.
I’d rather be shot, if you please.”

“You’d rather be damned!” he said; “and so you shall.
There now!”

“And why?”

“Nay; you are making a jest of it: it is exceedingly ill-natured!
And this is one: I’m going to tell it—but take care not to smile at any part of it.”

“Oh!
This is for the sake of one who comprehends in his person my feelings to Edgar and myself.
I hope I have misunderstood you, Isabella?”

“No, you have not,” said the infatuated girl.
The spirit which served her was growing intractable: she could neither lay nor control it.
I thought, though everybody hated and despised each other, they could not avoid loving me.
We were in the middle of winter, the wind blew strong from the north-east, and I objected.
That’s her account, at least: for she flew off in the height of it, and locked herself up.
You must let her have a maid to keep things tidy about her, and you must treat her kindly.
I have not broken your heart—you have broken it; and in breaking it, you have broken mine.
Ere long I perceived a group of the servants passing up the road towards the kitchen wing.
If he shot me so, I’d expire with a blessing on my lips.”

And there they were fast again.
Even if he had doted on me, the devilish nature would have revealed its existence somehow.
There was a labourer working at a fence round a plantation, on the borders of the grounds.
In his last he recommended my jewel to be careful of his; and kind to her when he got her.
To the Public, for the indulgent ear it has inclined to a plain tale with few pretensions.
“Loose Bessie’s hand, child: you cannot succeed in getting out by these means, be assured.
Next day, by noon, I was up and dressed, and sat wrapped in a shawl by the nursery hearth.
But now, though her voice was still sweet, I found in its melody an indescribable sadness.
“No sight so sad as that of a naughty child,” he began, “especially a naughty little girl.
The tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking forth, but it sank at her voice.
“I like it,” she answered, after a pause of a second or two, during which she examined me.
I need not say that I had my own reasons for dreading his coming: but come he did at last.
Somebody has plotted something: you cannot too soon find out who and what it is.”

“There!
Mr. Rochester would have me to come in, and I sat down in a quiet corner and watched them.
The minutes passed very slowly: fifteen were counted before the library-door again opened.
If you knew it, you are peculiarly situated: very near happiness; yes, within reach of it.
I have acted as I inwardly swore I would act; but further might try me beyond my strength.
Awaking in the dead of night, I opened my eyes on her disk—silver-white and crystal clear.
for God’s sake, come!”

A chamber-door opened: some one ran, or rushed, along the gallery.
I’ll fetch a surgeon for you now, myself: you’ll be able to be removed by morning, I hope.
He was not in any of the lower rooms; he was not in the yard, the stables, or the grounds.
Georgiana would chatter nonsense to her canary bird by the hour, and take no notice of me.
Fairfax told me in a letter.”

“And did she inform you what I went to do?”

“Oh, yes, sir!
“Sir, have you finished supper?”

“Yes, Jane.”

I rang the bell and ordered away the tray.
Some have whispered to you that she is my bastard half-sister: some, my cast-off mistress.
When I left college, I was sent out to Jamaica, to espouse a bride already courted for me.
“My brother in the interval was dead, and at the end of the four years my father died too.
Far from desiring to publish the connection, he became as anxious to conceal it as myself.
As to my own will or conscience, impassioned grief had trampled one and stifled the other.
When, therefore, a voice broke the strange stillness at last, it was audible enough to me.
“Yes—yes; open quickly.”

“Well, how wet and cold you must be, such a wild night as it is!
I nursed them all three.”

“That proves you must have been an honest and faithful servant.
Mutual recrimination passed between them: they parted in anger, and were never reconciled.
When half a year wasted in vain expectancy, my hope died out, and then I felt dark indeed.
On re-entering the parlour, I found Diana standing at the window, looking very thoughtful.
He has again and again explained that it is not himself, but his office he wishes to mate.
I entered—not now obliged to part with my whole fortune as the price of its accommodation.
“And this lady?”

“This lady, ma’am,” he answered, “turned out to be Mr. Rochester’s wife!
Of what use could Hindostanee be to you?”

“He intended me to go with him to India.”

“Ah!
Of late, Jane—only—only of late—I began to see and acknowledge the hand of God in my doom.
I suppose that she wanted to get another proof that the place was haunted, at my expense.
“Nay, Cathy,” the old man would say, “I cannot love thee, thou’rt worse than thy brother.
One or two is early enough for a person who lies till ten.”

“You shouldn’t lie till ten.
I believe I may assert that they were really in possession of deep and growing happiness.
Both the room and its occupants, and the scene they gazed on, looked wondrously peaceful.
We had all remarked, during some time, that Miss Linton fretted and pined over something.
Isabella swears that the love Edgar has for me is nothing to that she entertains for you.
Shall I break the seal?” “Yes,” she answered, without altering the direction of her eyes.
Hindley sat opposite, his head leant on his hand; perhaps meditating on the same subject.
There is nothing in the world less yours than he is!”

“Does Linton say so?” he demanded.
“Go to the sofa, then, and Ellen shall bring you some tea,” answered his uncle patiently.
“Is there aught ails th’ victuals?” he asked, thrusting the tray under Heathcliff’s nose.
You needn’t bespeak contempt, Linton: anybody will have it spontaneously at your service.
“Nay,” cried he, and retired, regardless of any prayers I could pour forth to detain him.
It was fastened; and, I remember, that accursed Earnshaw and my wife opposed my entrance.
Hareton is desirous of increasing his amount of knowledge,” I said, coming to his rescue.
You can make me so happy by speaking that little word.”

He muttered something inaudible.
“Get done, and begone!”

“And Hareton’s land, and his money,” pursued the reckless thing.
In the first place, his startling likeness to Catherine connected him fearfully with her.
“Yes,” she said, “and I have just finished it.”

And in five minutes more she shut it up.
She was in a room the folding-doors of which stood open: I went in when she addressed me.
I could not help it: the restlessness was in my nature; it agitated me to pain sometimes.
She appeared to be cross-questioning me, attempting to draw from me information unawares.
You are cold, because you are alone: no contact strikes the fire from you that is in you.
Will you say that of the master of the house!”

“He is not at home.”

“A profound remark!
Do you think, because I am poor, obscure, plain, and little, I am soulless and heartless?
A woman did, I doubt not, enter your room: and that woman was—must have been—Grace Poole.
I used all despatch, and am thankful I was not too late: as you, doubtless, must be also.
Here is a penny; now go—”

“A penny cannot feed me, and I have no strength to go farther.
Come in—your sisters are quite uneasy about you, and I believe there are bad folks about.
I thanked God—experienced amidst unutterable exhaustion a glow of grateful joy—and slept.
I shall not stay long at Morton, now that my father is dead, and that I am my own master.
Perhaps now you will ask how much you are worth?”

“How much am I worth?”

“Oh, a trifle!
I now closed Morton school, taking care that the parting should not be barren on my side.
“Just two miles, ma’am, across the fields.”

“My journey is closed,” I thought to myself.
I had no difficulty in restraining my voice from exclamation, my step from hasty advance.
“Are you not afraid of being carried away bodily, whenever you mention the devil’s name?
I warn you to refrain from provoking me, or I’ll ask your abduction as a special favour!
The poor thing discovered her loss directly—she screamed out—“Oh, he’s dead, Heathcliff!
We don’t in general take to foreigners here, Mr. Lockwood, unless they take to us first.
But, if you be ashamed of your touchiness, you must ask pardon, mind, when she comes in.
No law in England can hinder a man from keeping his house decent, and mine’s abominable!
“Give me Hareton, while you get the supper, and when it is ready ask me to sup with you.
The others were the satisfaction of my whims: and for Edgar’s sake, too, to satisfy him.
Bud I can look for norther horse nur man of a neeght loike this—as black as t’ chimbley!
This visitation worn’t for nowt, and I wod hev’ ye to look out, Miss—yah muh be t’ next.
Little Hareton was nearly five years old, and I had just begun to teach him his letters.
Heathcliff, I’m proud to show you, at last, somebody that dotes on you more than myself.
“If you have not courage to attack him, make an apology, or allow yourself to be beaten.
“You are talking in your sleep!”

“It’s against the wall, as it always is,” she replied.
You should have spoken to Edgar, indeed you should, and compelled him to leave me quiet!
At first she gave him no glance of recognition: he was invisible to her abstracted gaze.
He now recommenced his moody walk, and I raised the latch, and escaped into the kitchen.
She came forward eagerly to greet me, and held out one hand to take the expected letter.
She is, on the whole, a very fair narrator, and I don’t think I could improve her style.
His eyes, wide and wet, at last flashed fiercely on her; his breast heaved convulsively.
But it is utterly impossible I can ever be revenged, and therefore I cannot forgive him.
He was asleep in a corner, wrapped in a warm, fur-lined cloak, as if it had been winter.
“If you had any real griefs you’d be ashamed to waste a tear on this little contrariety.
Whether they satisfied Cathy I don’t know; but they appeared very worthless trash to me.
“We’ll see,” was her reply, and she set off at a gallop, leaving me to toil in the rear.
He burst into a laugh, and went away, saying he was glad I took that view of the matter.
Was Catherine obedient to her father’s commands?”

“She was,” continued the housekeeper.
I looked round impatiently—I felt her by me—I could almost see her, and yet I could not!
The intimacy thus commenced grew rapidly; though it encountered temporary interruptions.
and saying that on the next occasion I needn’t wait: I might set the things down and go.
“What shocking conduct, Miss Eyre, to strike a young gentleman, your benefactress’s son!
“The fall did not make you ill; what did, then?” pursued Mr. Lloyd when Bessie was gone.
She is always scolding me.”

“Because you’re such a queer, frightened, shy little thing.
“And now tell me who is the lady whom Mr. Brocklehurst called your benefactress?”

“Mrs.
Any one may serve: I have served here eight years; now all I want is to serve elsewhere.
I did not like her the worse for that; on the contrary, I felt better pleased than ever.
Man and horse were down; they had slipped on the sheet of ice which glazed the causeway.
It was evident, indeed, that she wished me to drop the subject, which I did accordingly.
It is no devil, I assure you; or if it be, it has put on the robes of an angel of light.
A card of mine lay on the table; this being perceived, brought my name under discussion.
In the midst of blaze and vapour, Mr. Rochester lay stretched motionless, in deep sleep.
I was now in the schoolroom; Adèle was drawing; I bent over her and directed her pencil.
“I have not considered the subject,” said he indifferently, looking straight before him.
It was beautiful, but too solemn: I half rose, and stretched my arm to draw the curtain.
I had put on some clothes, though horror shook all my limbs; I issued from my apartment.
“Was anybody stirring below when you went down, Jane?” inquired Mr. Rochester presently.
Be of good cheer, Richard; step out—that’s it!”

“I do feel better,” remarked Mr. Mason.
He came down to Gateshead about three weeks ago and wanted missis to give up all to him.
“Is that a portrait of some one you know?” asked Eliza, who had approached me unnoticed.
I yet lingered half-an-hour longer, hoping to see some sign of amity: but she gave none.
it writhed and groaned; while wind roared in the laurel walk, and came sweeping over us.
“Jane, you look blooming, and smiling, and pretty,” said he: “truly pretty this morning.
He is a proud man: all the Rochesters were proud: and his father, at least, liked money.
I hated the business, I begged leave to defer it: no—it should be gone through with now.
Now, however, I considered it well to let them flow as freely and as long as they liked.
She flattered me, and lavishly displayed for my pleasure her charms and accomplishments.
It seemed as if a linnet had hopped to my foot and proposed to bear me on its tiny wing.
“Well, I would rather die yonder than in a street or on a frequented road,” I reflected.
“A little more, St. John—look at the avidity in her eyes.”

“No more at present, sister.
Diana intimated that this would be a different parting from any they had ever yet known.
He found me in the kitchen, watching the progress of certain cakes for tea, then baking.
I was with an equal—one with whom I might argue—one whom, if I saw good, I might resist.
Through my means, He opens to you a noble career; as my wife only can you enter upon it.
The prayer over, we took leave of him: he was to go at a very early hour in the morning.
Let me hear now.”

Thus urged, I began the narrative of my experience for the last year.
He sees not as man sees, but far clearer: judges not as man judges, but far more wisely.
The coincidence struck me as too awful and inexplicable to be communicated or discussed.
Mr. Rochester told me to give you and Mary this.” I put into his hand a five-pound note.
“Maister, maister, he’s staling t’ lanthern!” shouted the ancient, pursuing my retreat.
A nothing vexed him; and suspected slights of his authority nearly threw him into fits.
I do wish he would!”

“What a noise for nothing!” I cried, though rather uneasy myself.
He succeeded; but Edgar did not mean to entertain him with any high flights of passion.
Heathcliff measured the height and breadth of the speaker with an eye full of derision.
And here is a moor-cock’s; and this—I should know it among a thousand—it’s a lapwing’s.
Quick, why don’t you move?”

“Because I won’t give you your death of cold,” I answered.
Get my horse, I say.”

“I’ll see thee damned before I be thy servant!” growled the lad.
The uncivil little thing stood on tiptoe, and whispered a sentence in Heathcliff’s ear.
I, like a fool, didn’t recollect that, till I heard her laughing and exclaiming—“Ellen!
“I don’t hate my son, I suppose; and it is concerning him that I demand your attention.
Miss Cathy, I’ll knock the lock off with a stone: you won’t believe that vile nonsense.
Tell uncle I’m in tolerable health, will you?”

“I’ll tell him that you say so, Linton.
She trembled like a reed, poor thing, and leant against the table perfectly bewildered.
“Should you wish it, I’ll settle with you now,” and I drew my note-book from my pocket.
My soul’s bliss kills my body, but does not satisfy itself.”

“Happy, master?” I cried.
To the Press, for the fair field its honest suffrage has opened to an obscure aspirant.
“What would Uncle Reed say to you, if he were alive?” was my scarcely voluntary demand.
“Were I in her place, it seems to me I should wish the earth to open and swallow me up.
I was just leaving the stile; yet, as the path was narrow, I sat still to let it go by.
I tried again to sleep; but my heart beat anxiously: my inward tranquillity was broken.
And did I now think Miss Ingram such a choice as Mr. Rochester would be likely to make?
“I shall begin to put some faith in you presently.”

I knelt within half a yard of her.
Mr. Rochester’s extreme pallor had disappeared, and he looked once more firm and stern.
Calming himself by an effort, he added—

“A servant has had the nightmare; that is all.
I never laughed at presentiments in my life, because I have had strange ones of my own.
I promised to contribute a water-colour drawing: this put her at once into good humour.
“And,” she added, “I am obliged to you for your valuable services and discreet conduct!
I said I should like to go; but reminded it, as you did me, that I had no wings to fly.
CHAPTER XXV
The month of courtship had wasted: its very last hours were being numbered.
I came into this room, and the sight of the empty chair and fireless hearth chilled me.
In the deep shade, at the farther end of the room, a figure ran backwards and forwards.
Where turn for a companion and for some hope?”

“Do as I do: trust in God and yourself.
Drearily I wound my way downstairs: I knew what I had to do, and I did it mechanically.
I turned my prayer to thanksgiving: the Source of Life was also the Saviour of spirits.
When he is at home, he is in his own parish at Morton.”

“That village a few miles off?
Poor child!—poor girl!”

Diana had a voice toned, to my ear, like the cooing of a dove.
I first got an idea of its calibre when I heard him preach in his own church at Morton.
Well, propensities and principles must be reconciled by some means.”

He left the room.
“I forgot!” she exclaimed, shaking her beautiful curled head, as if shocked at herself.
Diana Rivers had designated her brother “inexorable as death.” She had not exaggerated.
It disappeared in his glove; and, with one hasty nod and “good-afternoon,” he vanished.
But I did not love my servitude: I wished, many a time, he had continued to neglect me.
I am sensible of no light kindling—no life quickening—no voice counselling or cheering.
You have but one end to keep in view—how the work you have undertaken can best be done.
I replied, that nothing ailed me save anxiety of mind, which I hoped soon to alleviate.
They say she had nearly burnt her husband in his bed once: but I don’t know about that.
I approached him with the now only half-filled glass; Pilot followed me, still excited.
He would visit the school sometimes?”

“Daily.”

“He would approve of your plans, Jane?
I don’t care—I will get in!” So resolved, I grasped the latch and shook it vehemently.
I saw a red ornamented title—“Seventy Times Seven, and the First of the Seventy-First.
“Have mercy on your own soul!” I said, endeavouring to snatch the glass from his hand.
Have you been for a soldier?”

“Go and carry my message,” he interrupted, impatiently.
She averted her face: he apparently put some question which she had no mind to answer.
Had I been a few hours sooner Mrs. Linton’s illness might have arrested her rash step.
And then, Linton would be nothing, nor Hindley, nor all the dreams that ever I dreamt.
You’d hardly credit it, but the very morrow of our wedding she was weeping to go home.
“Her senses never returned: she recognised nobody from the time you left her,” I said.
I’ve recovered from my first desire to be killed by him: I’d rather he’d kill himself!
Catherine had an awfully perverted taste to esteem him so dearly, knowing him so well.
“The charge exploded, and the knife, in springing back, closed into its owner’s wrist.
“I guessed he uttered those words, at least, though his voice was hardly intelligible.
“Why, guess!” he returned, dismounting, and slinging his bridle on a hook by the door.
I’ll console Mr. Edgar by acquainting him with the turn Heathcliff’s humour has taken.
Time wore on at the Grange in its former pleasant way till Miss Cathy reached sixteen.
Heathcliff bade me be quiet; and, preceding us up the path, hastened to open the door.
“Oh, I’ll ask you, uncle,” cried Miss Cathy, recollecting the housekeeper’s assertion.
But he’s no fool; and I can sympathise with all his feelings, having felt them myself.
“You won’t go to-morrow, recollect, Miss!” I commenced, when we were out of the house.
I beat him constantly: and he got cross again, and coughed, and returned to his chair.
The havoc that months had previously wrought was now emulated by the inroads of hours.
Why didn’t you send to absolve me from my promise, when you wished I wouldn’t keep it?
Hate my father, and spare me for contempt.”

“Nonsense!” cried Catherine in a passion.
If I pitied you for crying and looking so very frightened, you should spurn such pity.
You could pity your own sufferings; and she pitied them, too; but you won’t pity hers!
As soon as he recovered, I related our compulsory visit, and detention at the Heights.
“She does not seem so amiable,” I thought, “as Mrs. Dean would persuade me to believe.
I can hardly bear to see him.”

He bent his eyes to the ground, and walked moodily in.
I held the mistress’s post in making tea and carving; so I was indispensable at table.
I tottered, and on regaining my equilibrium retired back a step or two from his chair.
Raw and chill was the winter morning: my teeth chattered as I hastened down the drive.
I mastered the rising hysteria, lifted up my head, and took a firm stand on the stool.
She wore it till evening, patient, unresentful, regarding it as a deserved punishment.
Mr. Rochester is an amateur of the decided and eccentric: Grace is eccentric at least.
She sighed a sigh of ineffable satisfaction, as if her cup of happiness were now full.
“Do you know,” said she, “that, of the three characters, I liked you in the last best?
They were warmer last night when I touched them at the door of the mysterious chamber.
She wished me to look after the house, to see callers, and answer notes of condolence.
When I looked up, on leaving his arms, there stood the widow, pale, grave, and amazed.
Here is a talisman will remove all difficulties;’ and she held out a pretty gold ring.
“Yes; though I touch it, it is a dream,” said I, as I put it down from before my face.
The operation was performed amidst the fiercest yells and the most convulsive plunges.
I longed only for what suited me—for the antipodes of the Creole: and I longed vainly.
I will hold to the principles received by me when I was sane, and not mad—as I am now.
May your eyes never shed such stormy, scalding, heart-wrung tears as poured from mine.
“It may be a candle in a house,” I then conjectured; “but if so, I can never reach it.
Hannah had brought me some gruel and dry toast, about, as I supposed, the dinner-hour.
After a weary process, and resting every five minutes, I succeeded in dressing myself.
If you were my real sister it would be different: I should take you, and seek no wife.
No need to listen for doors opening—to fancy steps on the pavement or the gravel-walk!
Now, let me leave you an instant, to make a better fire, and have the hearth swept up.
Too stupefied to be curious myself, I fastened my door and glanced round for the bed.
He did not forget me; for he had a kind heart, though he was rather severe sometimes.
His sister began weeping to go home, and Cathy stood by confounded, blushing for all.
That will be a novelty: but she may come to the point—as she will—I sha’n’t help her!
It’s no jest to me!” said the young lady, scowling, and turning her face to the fire.
And as to you, Catherine, I have a mind to speak a few words now, while we are at it.
“Well, I won’t repeat my offer of a wife: it is as bad as offering Satan a lost soul.
“It is disgraceful that she should own him for a friend, and force his company on me!
Had Edgar never gathered our conversation, he would never have been the worse for it.
that’s dreadful!”

Her fingers clutched the clothes, and gathered them over her eyes.
There never was such a dreary, dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house presented!
He was the only thing there that seemed decent; and I thought he never looked better.
But wouldn’t it be better to prevent my coming in contact with them, or their master?
It hardly moved my compassion—it appalled me: still, I felt reluctant to quit him so.
I’m not aware that he could have done it to any purpose, had he been ever so willing.
I silently shook my questioner, and at last succeeded in equipping her for departure.
He seemed studying the familiar landscape with a stranger’s and an artist’s interest.
I hav’n’t shown it yet, but you needn’t imagine I shall keep your ridiculous secrets.
I might just as well talk of loving the miller who comes once a year to buy our corn.
I’ve got your letters, and if you give me any pertness I’ll send them to your father.
“Worthy Mrs. Dean, I like you, but I don’t like your double-dealing,” he added aloud.
“You may be right, Ellen,” she answered; “but I shall never feel at ease till I know.
you left it open; and those—those detestable creatures won’t bring coals to the fire.
I returned to her apartment, extinguished my candle, and seated myself in the window.
I relinquished my labour of agony, and turned consoled at once: unspeakably consoled.
He had not only twitched his shoulder but clenched his fist, as if tempted to use it.
“What fiend possesses you to stare back at me, continually, with those infernal eyes?
But nah, shoo’s taan my garden fro’ me, and by th’ heart, maister, I cannot stand it!
He laid them on the table, looked eagerly towards the window, then rose and went out.
Oh, Mr. Lockwood, I cannot express what a terrible start I got by the momentary view!
what a wicked ’un he looks, girning at death!” and the old sinner grinned in mockery.
“They are afraid of nothing,” I grumbled, watching their approach through the window.
Am I a servant?”

“No; you are less than a servant, for you do nothing for your keep.
Steps came running along the outer passage; the key turned, Bessie and Abbot entered.
The upper teachers now punctually resumed their posts: but still, all seemed to wait.
I was similarly equipped, and, following the stream, I made my way into the open air.
“You’re not grown so very tall, Miss Jane, nor so very stout,” continued Mrs. Leaven.
In two minutes he rose from the stile: his face expressed pain when he tried to move.
His deportment had now for some weeks been more uniform towards me than at the first.
I retired to a window-seat, and taking a book from a table near, endeavoured to read.
“She says it’s not her mission to appear before the ‘vulgar herd’ (them’s her words).
Another step stamped on the flooring above and something fell; and there was silence.
I responded that it was merely a fancy head, and hurried it beneath the other sheets.
“Who are you?” looking at me with surprise and a sort of alarm, but still not wildly.
I would scorn such a union: therefore I am better than you—let me go!”

“Where, Jane?
“I am not an angel,” I asserted; “and I will not be one till I die: I will be myself.
You don’t talk very wisely just now; any more than those gentlemen acted very wisely.
As to the new existence, it is all right: you shall yet be my wife: I am not married.
The great gates were closed and locked; but a wicket in one of them was only latched.
Oh, that fear of his self-abandonment—far worse than my abandonment—how it goaded me!
“That is an ignis fatuus,” was my first thought; and I expected it would soon vanish.
Mary and Diana, let us go into the parlour and talk the matter over.”

They withdrew.
I am but the incumbent of a poor country parish: my aid must be of the humblest sort.
Thus occupied, and mutually entertained, days passed like hours, and weeks like days.
“We are now without father: we shall soon be without home and brother,” she murmured.
Flushed and kindled thus, he looked nearly as beautiful for a man as she for a woman.
I had also made myself neat, and had now the afternoon before me to spend as I would.
His lips parted, as if to speak: but he checked the coming sentence, whatever it was.
I am disposed to be as content as a queen, and you try to stir me up to restlessness!
If I join St. John, I abandon half myself: if I go to India, I go to premature death.
To do so, you must have a coadjutor: not a brother—that is a loose tie—but a husband.
The hills beyond Marsh Glen sent the answer faintly back—“Where are you?” I listened.
Dreadful question: there was no one here to answer it—not even dumb sign, mute token.
It was a terrible spectacle: I witnessed it myself.”

“At dead of night!” I muttered.
“Mary,” I said, “how are you?”

She started as if she had seen a ghost: I calmed her.
I suppose I should now entertain none but fatherly feelings for you: do you think so?
I thought, if I had caused the cloud, it was my duty to make an effort to dispel it.
I thought it was morning; and I had set out on my way home, with Joseph for a guide.
Edgar Linton, after an inquisitive stare, collected sufficient wit to recognise her.
“And where is the sense of that?”

“To show that I do take notice,” said Heathcliff.
All warks togither for gooid to them as is chozzen, and piked out fro’ th’ rubbidge!
“That Heathcliff—you recollect him, sir—who used to live at Mr. Earnshaw’s.”

“What!
“Come in, that’s right!” exclaimed the mistress, gaily, pulling a chair to the fire.
“Well, it seems a weary number of hours,” she muttered doubtfully: “it must be more.
“Have you no place you call a parlour?”

“Parlour!” he echoed, sneeringly, “parlour!
If I let you alone for half a day, won’t you come sighing and wheedling to me again?
You say she is often restless, and anxious-looking: is that a proof of tranquillity?
“Poor wretch!” I thought; “you have a heart and nerves the same as your brother men!
would that he could be blotted out of creation, and out of my memory!”

“Hush, hush!
“Yester-evening I sat in my nook reading some old books till late on towards twelve.
‘You won’t object?’

“‘No, you may keep him out the whole night for me,’ I answered.
“He talked about ‘our house,’ and ‘our folk.’ I thought he had been the owner’s son.
He perceives his delicate constitution, and the necessity of treating him tolerably.
I could gather from her that he continued in weak health, and was a tiresome inmate.
“I cannot read it.”

“Can’t read it?” cried Catherine; “I can read it: it’s English.
She must have had a warm heart, when she loved her father so, to give so much to me.
He said to me, a few days afterwards, ‘I wish my nephew would write, Ellen, or call.
On entering the house, I looked about for some one to give information of Catherine.
“It will be odd if I thwart myself,” he muttered, unconscious that I was behind him.
wisht!” muttered the young man, reproachfully; “I will not hear you speak so to him.
The most ordinary faces of men and women—my own features—mock me with a resemblance.
And, Nelly, once for all, let me beg you to warn Hareton and the other away from me.
Life appears to me too short to be spent in nursing animosity or registering wrongs.
“Well, for once it may pass; but please not to let the circumstance occur too often.
I now felt that an elderly lady was no bad ingredient in the business I had on hand.
Mrs. Fairfax was dusting some vases of fine purple spar, which stood on a sideboard.
However, the event showed me I was a fool for entertaining a sense even of surprise.
The old gentleman was fond of money, and anxious to keep the family estate together.
When I heard this, I was beginning to feel a strange chill and failing at the heart.
Miss Ingram was a mark beneath jealousy: she was too inferior to excite the feeling.
It was not till after dinner that I saw him again: he then seemed quite at his ease.
Of course, I lied: it was, in fact, a very faithful representation of Mr. Rochester.
She put up her spectacles, shut the Bible, and pushed her chair back from the table.
When I rallied, which I soon did, he walked gently with me up the path to the porch.
Mr. Rochester was not to me what he had been; for he was not what I had thought him.
Oh, I am certain Jane will agree with me in opinion, when she knows all that I know!
You talk of it as a mere matter of course.”

“It was with me; and I did not like it.
I laid my hand on the back of a chair for support: I shook, I feared—but I resolved.
Rochester!”

“Withdraw, then,—I consent; but remember, you leave me here in anguish.
In the midst of my pain of heart and frantic effort of principle, I abhorred myself.
High banks of moor were about me; the crag protected my head: the sky was over that.
I looked at the sky; it was pure: a kindly star twinkled just above the chasm ridge.
I stood in the position of one without a resource, without a friend, without a coin.
what could she do with them?”

Reader, it is not pleasant to dwell on these details.
The two ladies, their brother, Mr. St. John, the old servant, were all gazing at me.
She had, I thought, a remarkable countenance, instinct both with power and goodness.
There were the means of washing in the room, and a comb and brush to smooth my hair.
All three looked at each other, and all three smiled—a dreary, pensive smile enough.
“No, I cannot stay; I have only brought you a little parcel my sisters left for you.
I wonder at the goodness of God; the generosity of my friends; the bounty of my lot.
I have watched you ever since we first met: I have made you my study for ten months.
He descended the one step, and advanced slowly and gropingly towards the grass-plat.
Entering the room very softly, I had a view of him before he discovered my presence.
I had long had the impression that since I could nowhere find you, you must be dead.
To be together is for us to be at once as free as in solitude, as gay as in company.
she would have scorned to do it, if she had been spitted on the horns of a mad cow.
‘The rascals knew that yesterday was my rent-day: they thought to have me cleverly.
They shut the house door below, never noting our absence, it was so full of people.
I am sure you have thought a great deal more than the generality of servants think.
But never mind Linton at present: tell me, were you not with Heathcliff last night?
Our young lady returned to us saucier and more passionate, and haughtier than ever.
The first time she left her chamber was at the commencement of the following March.
A hideous notion struck me: how powerful I should be possessing such an instrument!
I insisted on being provided instantly with a place of refuge, and means of repose.
The moment her regard ceased, I would have torn his heart out, and drunk his blood!
And take a good look at that countenance: she’s near the point which would suit me.
And you both come to bewail the deed to me, as if you were the people to be pitied!
“Papa told you not to say any bad words, and you can’t open your mouth without one.
It was more simple and more eloquent than her cousin’s: very pretty and very silly.
He knaws—ay, he knaws, as weel as I do, who sud be t’ maister yonder—Ech, ech, ech!
“‘Young master is in the house,’ said Zillah, as she saw me making for the parlour.
“This is something like your paradise,” said she, making an effort at cheerfulness.
Her presence was with me: it remained while I re-filled the grave, and led me home.
Get up, instantly, and tell him.’

“Having uttered this speech, she vanished again.
“Yes, I hear him trying to spell and read to himself, and pretty blunders he makes!
“How dreary life gets over in that house!” I reflected, while riding down the road.
then it is with Mrs. Heathcliff you must settle,” she observed; “or rather with me.
Are you ready to go?”

“It is not eight o’clock!” she answered, rising unwillingly.
I take so little interest in my daily life that I hardly remember to eat and drink.
It was too irksome to lie there, harassing my brain with a hundred idle misgivings.
“I was reading.”

“Show the book.”

I returned to the window and fetched it thence.
Was it, I asked myself, a ray from the moon penetrating some aperture in the blind?
The duration of each lesson was measured by the clock, which at last struck twelve.
Bitter and truculent when excited, I spoke as I felt, without reserve or softening.
Surely it will never, on the contrary, be suffered to degenerate from man to fiend?
Then her soul sat on her lips, and language flowed, from what source I cannot tell.
At once weary and content, I slept soon and soundly: when I awoke it was broad day.
The party were expected to arrive on Thursday afternoon, in time for dinner at six.
Every one seemed in high glee; laughter and conversation were general and animated.
He watched me a second, then saying, “Remember!—No conversation,” he left the room.
But I have a veil—it is down: I may make shift yet to behave with decent composure.
Don’t flatter me.”

He pursued his theme, however, without noticing my deprecation.
“To the right-about—every soul!” cried the master; “away with your congratulations!
Mr. Rochester stayed a moment behind us, to give some further order to Grace Poole.
I found her a fine woman, in the style of Blanche Ingram: tall, dark, and majestic.
If I tear, if I rend the slight prison, my outrage will only let the captive loose.
Whitcross regained, I followed a road which led from the sun, now fervent and high.
Renewing then my courage, and gathering my feeble remains of strength, I pushed on.
“But he is in a better place,” continued Hannah: “we shouldn’t wish him here again.
Besides, the words Legacy, Bequest, go side by side with the words, Death, Funeral.
I replied—

“There is no dishonour, no breach of promise, no desertion in the case.
I will leave you, Diana.” And I hastened upstairs as I saw him entering the garden.
From behind one pillar I could peep round quietly at the full front of the mansion.
He is a handsome man: tall, fair, with blue eyes, and a Grecian profile.”

(Aside.)
Nelly, thy nurse.”

He retreated out of arm’s length, and picked up a large flint.
I declined answering Mrs. Dean’s question, which struck me as something heterodox.
And I won’t come suing for his assistance; nor will I bring him into more trouble.
I gave him my heart, and he took and pinched it to death, and flung it back to me.
“‘You, and I,’ he said, ‘have each a great debt to settle with the man out yonder!
I’ve formed my resolution, and by God I’ll execute it!’ cried the desperate being.
He then took a stone, struck down the division between two windows, and sprang in.
“This is your cousin Cathy, Linton,” he said, putting their little hands together.
There you experience the consequence of scorning ‘book-larning,’ as you would say.
“Look, Miss!” I exclaimed, pointing to a nook under the roots of one twisted tree.
And so I opened and closed them a hundred times a night—to be always disappointed!
Oh, Lord, judge ’em, for there’s norther law nor justice among wer rullers!”

“No!
You look uncommonly animated.”

“Where should good news come from to me?” he said.
“Let your will be a while: you’ll be spared to repent of your many injustices yet!
Why was I always suffering, always browbeaten, always accused, for ever condemned?
Can you tell me some of them?”

How much I wished to reply fully to this question!
“Now,” thought I, “I can perhaps get her to talk.” I sat down by her on the floor.
I should not have suspected that it meant she was dying; but I knew instantly now!
By the fire stood a little fellow of three years old, in plaid frock and trousers.
Reader, though I look comfortably accommodated, I am not very tranquil in my mind.
At this moment I am not disposed to accost her.”

I sat down quite disembarrassed.
“And not even in Hay Lane, or the fields about it, could you find a trace of them.
Amy and Louisa Eshton tittered under their breath, and looked a little frightened.
Not, however, to go to bed: on the contrary, I began and dressed myself carefully.
I approached the bed; I opened the curtains and leant over the high-piled pillows.
Don’t long for poison—don’t turn out a downright Eve on my hands!”

“Why not, sir?
“Will it please you to dine with me to-day?” he asked, as we re-entered the gates.
I thought I had found the source of your melancholy in a dream.”

I shook my head.
You sit quietly where I have placed you, and regard me with a weary, passive look.
Then I should have asked you to accept my pledge of fidelity and to give me yours.
The last was an awful blank: something like the world when the deluge was gone by.
It is seldom, indeed, an English face comes so near the antique models as did his.
CHAPTER XXX
The more I knew of the inmates of Moor House, the better I liked them.
Knitting, sewing, reading, writing, ciphering, will be all you will have to teach.
She would canter up to the door on her pony, followed by a mounted livery servant.
He appeared a taciturn, and perhaps a proud personage; but he was very kind to me.
they smile when sordid souls triumph, and feeble ones weep over their destruction.
“Write to Diana and Mary to-morrow,” I said, “and tell them to come home directly.
I have proved you in that time by sundry tests: and what have I seen and elicited?
CHAPTER XXXV
He did not leave for Cambridge the next day, as he had said he would.
I am not under the slightest obligation to go to India, especially with strangers.
Once more on the road to Thornfield, I felt like the messenger-pigeon flying home.
Who can tell what a dark, dreary, hopeless life I have dragged on for months past?
I began to experience remorse, repentance; the wish for reconcilement to my Maker.
“You’ll go with him to hell!” exclaimed his master, or whatever relation he bore.
“My head aches, till I cannot keep it on the pillow; and still I can’t give over.
However, I will say this, he was the quietest child that ever nurse watched over.
It hurt me to think the master should be made uncomfortable by his own good deed.
He told me to put on my cloak and run to Gimmerton for the doctor and the parson.
For himself, he grew desperate: his sorrow was of that kind that will not lament.
“It’s no company at all, when people know nothing and say nothing,” she muttered.
I spat out, and affirmed it tasted detestably—I would not take it on any account.
His visits were a continual nightmare to me; and, I suspected, to my master also.
“Get away, now; he’ll return with a brace of pistols and half-a-dozen assistants.
You mention that name and I end the matter instantly by a spring from the window!
The second question I have great interest in; it is this—Is Mr. Heathcliff a man?
“I suppose Mr. Heathcliff does not lodge at the top of the house, does he?”

“Oh!
it’s Maister Hathecliff’s ye’re wanting?” cried he, as if making a new discovery.
But she already partook of the pervading spirit of neglect which encompassed her.
That entrance was fastened, and we heard him coming round to get in by the other.
“‘Isabella, let me in, or I’ll make you repent!’ he ‘girned,’ as Joseph calls it.
“Only nobody else must be kind to him: I’m jealous of monopolising his affection.
I ran into the yard, sick with terror; and called for Zillah, as loud as I could.
I endured it two or three hours; at length, I heard a footstep: not Heathcliff’s.
And you say she’s sick; and yet you leave her alone, up there in a strange house!
All was composed, however: Catherine’s despair was as silent as her father’s joy.
and unslinging his gun, restrained himself from his Sunday occupations no longer.
I wish you would repeat Chevy Chase as you did yesterday: it was extremely funny.
ye’re a raight nowt; and shoo’s another; and that poor lad ’ll be lost atween ye.
“He’s gone out at present, and won’t return soon.”

“About the rent,” I answered.
That will be all shown to the master,” I exclaimed, “the minute it is discovered.
While I admired and they laboured, dusk drew on, and with it returned the master.
I have a single wish, and my whole being and faculties are yearning to attain it.
“I should indeed like to go to school,” was the audible conclusion of my musings.
What a singularly deep impression her injustice seems to have made on your heart!
The hall-door, which was half of glass, stood open; I stepped over the threshold.
He is gone to the Leas, Mr. Eshton’s place, ten miles on the other side Millcote.
“Well, John” (leaning out), “any news?”

“They’re coming, ma’am,” was the answer.
Miss Ingram, I am sure you will not fail in evincing superiority to idle terrors.
He scowled at first; then, as if recollecting something, he said—

“Right, right!
I offered to sketch their portraits; and each, in turn, sat for a pencil outline.
I will go back as soon as I can stir: I need not make an absolute fool of myself.
I make for the wicket leading to the shrubbery, and I see Mr. Rochester entering.
I have no bride!”

“But you will have.”

“Yes;—I will!—I will!” He set his teeth.
Do you hear that?”

I did, and I could not quite comprehend it: it made me giddy.
I could not, in those days, see God for His creature: of whom I had made an idol.
Oh, never more could it turn to him; for faith was blighted—confidence destroyed!
Now he made an effort to rest his head on my shoulder, but I would not permit it.
I had dared and baffled his fury; I must elude his sorrow: I retired to the door.
I left that; it was not mine: it was the visionary bride’s who had melted in air.
She was a great reader, and studied a deal; and the “bairns” had taken after her.
I wondered, as I looked at this fair creature: I admired her with my whole heart.
It smiles!”

“Would it comfort, or would it wound you to have a similar painting?
One afternoon, however, I got leave to stay at home, because I really had a cold.
“Is he dead?”

“I mean the present gentleman, Mr. Edward’s father,” he explained.
It was a sudden meeting, and one in which rapture was kept well in check by pain.
I presume, because, with that face, I’m sure you cannot help being good-hearted.
“And should I always be sitting with you?” she demanded, growing more irritated.
“What’s that, then?” I retorted, showing a decided purple witness to refute her.
You were not speaking the truth, were you?”

“I assure you I was,” she returned.
“God bless thee, darling!” I cried, forgetting instantaneously my foolish fears.
Had it been another, I would have covered my face in the presence of such grief.
He coloured deeper, with a different feeling, muttered an oath, and turned away.
CHAPTER XIX
A letter, edged with black, announced the day of my master’s return.
His had first-rate qualities, and they are lost: rendered worse than unavailing.
“Unless you will, here I go.”

“I promise, Ellen!” she cried, catching my dress.
“Ellen, I wish you could open the door,” whispered back my companion, anxiously.
Don’t mind Mrs. Dean’s cruel cautions; but be generous, and contrive to see him.
“How do you feel now, Master Heathcliff?” I inquired, after waiting ten minutes.
you’re a heartless, selfish boy!”

“I can’t stay with her,” he answered crossly.
“Missis walked in,” she said, “as chill as an icicle, and as high as a princess.
I read in his countenance what anguish it was to offer that sacrifice to spleen.
I have not written my will yet; and how to leave my property I cannot determine.
Of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful was apportioned to each pupil.
Still I felt that Helen Burns considered things by a light invisible to my eyes.
Happily I do not mean to harm it: but, if I did, it would not take harm from me.
Why, you have saved my life!—snatched me from a horrible and excruciating death!
Shall you be there, Mrs. Fairfax?”

“No; I pleaded off, and he admitted my plea.
It seemed to me that some event must follow the strange cry, struggle, and call.
I have striven long to avoid exposure, and I should not like it to come at last.
He was dressed now: he still looked pale, but he was no longer gory and sullied.
I must send away half the servants and shut up part of the house; or let it off.
“I was trying to turn myself a few minutes since, and find I cannot move a limb.
“You would be strangely incredulous if you did doubt it,” was my mental comment.
“I feel so astonished,” she began, “I hardly know what to say to you, Miss Eyre.
Tell me what you feel.”

“I could not, sir: no words could tell you what I feel.
“Does not Sophie sleep with Adèle in the nursery?” he asked, as I lit my candle.
Will you ever forgive me?”

Reader, I forgave him at the moment and on the spot.
“Sir, your wife is living: that is a fact acknowledged this morning by yourself.
Can you listen to me?”

“Yes, sir; for hours if you will.”

“I ask only minutes.
A mere reed she feels in my hand!” (And he shook me with the force of his hold.)
Disappointed in the expectation of a customer, she coolly acceded to my request.
My star vanished as I drew near: some obstacle had intervened between me and it.
At present, they and I have a difficulty in understanding each other’s language.
Both he and I had our backs towards the path leading up the field to the wicket.
I saw his solemn eye melt with sudden fire, and flicker with resistless emotion.
I had amongst my scholars several farmers’ daughters: young women grown, almost.
But that heart is already laid on a sacred altar: the fire is arranged round it.
I thought perhaps the alterations had disturbed some old associations he valued.
I should have confided in him: he would never have forced me to be his mistress.
He is not like you, sir: I am not happy at his side, nor near him, nor with him.
Don’t you feel hungry?”

“The third day from this must be our wedding-day, Jane.
I had Cathy by the hand, and was urging her on, when all at once she fell down.
The man took Cathy up; she was sick: not from fear, I’m certain, but from pain.
Ah, I thought, there will be no saving him: he’s doomed, and flies to his fate!
But, with the help of Satan, I shall make you swallow the carving-knife, Nelly!
He’s patience itsseln wi’ sich careless, offald craters—patience itsseln he is!
Her brother, who loved her tenderly, was appalled at this fantastic preference.
One time I passed the old gate, going out of my way, on a journey to Gimmerton.
Superstition urged me to comply with this impulse: supposing he should be dead!
I brought a glass full; and as she would not drink, I sprinkled it on her face.
These three awful nights I’ve never closed my lids—and oh, I’ve been tormented!
No mother could have nursed an only child more devotedly than Edgar tended her.
My communication with Heathcliff’s family shall be as sparing as his with mine.
It was a marvellous effort of perspicacity to discover that I did not love her.
“If you are called upon in a court of law, you’ll remember her language, Nelly!
We made her stop: she’d fain have ridden forwards, afeard you should be uneasy.
“Take it away.”

Joseph snatched up the food indignantly, and brought it to us.
“Zillah is constantly gadding off to Gimmerton since papa went: it’s miserable!
He advanced direct to us, seized Linton by the arm, and swung him off the seat.
It had appeared wrong to take the journey once; now it seemed wrong to refrain.
He clasped her in his two feeble arms sobbing:—“Won’t you have me, and save me?
“I’ll marry him within this hour, if I may go to Thrushcross Grange afterwards.
The first occasion of her coming down into the house was on a Sunday afternoon.
“Eea, f’r owt ee knaw!” she answered, skurrying away with a pan of hot cinders.
Hareton will ask the master to send you upstairs, if you don’t behave!” I said.
When I call you stupid, I don’t mean anything: I don’t mean that I despise you.
Joseph shuffled up and made a noise, but resolutely refused to meddle with him.
John had not much affection for his mother and sisters, and an antipathy to me.
Who would think that the Evil One had already found a servant and agent in her?
You have been charged with falsehood; defend yourself to me as well as you can.
The school, thus improved, became in time a truly useful and noble institution.
Now run!”

I did run; I brought the candle which still remained in the gallery.
Don’t move, remember, or call any one.”

He went: I watched the light withdraw.
Leah stood up in the window-seat, rubbing the panes of glass dimmed with smoke.
I remembered his fine voice; I knew he liked to sing—good singers generally do.
Here we are at Thornfield: now let me get down.”

He landed me on the pavement.
You say you love me, Janet: yes—I will not forget that; and you cannot deny it.
Whatever I do with its cage, I cannot get at it—the savage, beautiful creature!
That kind master, who could not sleep now, was waiting with impatience for day.
My hunger, sharp before, was, if not satisfied, appeased by this hermit’s meal.
I again nestled to the breast of the hill; and ere long in sleep forgot sorrow.
What business had I to approach the white door or touch the glittering knocker?
I noticed these objects cursorily only—in them there was nothing extraordinary.
A pang of exquisite suffering—a throe of true despair—rent and heaved my heart.
I sank on the wet doorstep: I groaned—I wrung my hands—I wept in utter anguish.
and that we may dismiss you to the moor and the rainy night?”

I looked at her.
You look a raight down dacent little crater.”

“That will do—I forgive you now.
No blame attached to me: I am as free from culpability as any one of you three.
Thought fitted thought; opinion met opinion: we coincided, in short, perfectly.
“I will; and you shall hear how poor the proposal is,—how trivial—how cramping.
Diana and Mary have left you, and Moor House is shut up, and you are so lonely.
This was wealth indeed!—wealth to the heart!—a mine of pure, genial affections.
I inquired whether this was the case: no doubt in a somewhat crest-fallen tone.
But I feel mine is not the existence to be long protracted under an Indian sun.
The wind sighed low in the firs: all was moorland loneliness and midnight hush.
Yes, I knew the character of this landscape: I was sure we were near my bourne.
I requested him to shut the door and sit down: I had some questions to ask him.
)—was at least alive: was, in short, “the present gentleman.” Gladdening words!
His countenance reminded one of a lamp quenched, waiting to be re-lit—and alas!
Of course, St. John Rivers’ name came in frequently in the progress of my tale.
Is such really the state of matters between you and Rivers?”

“Absolutely, sir!
Both Captain Fitzjames and Mr. Wharton love their wives, and are loved by them.
But Mr. Heathcliff forms a singular contrast to his abode and style of living.
No, I’m running on too fast: I bestow my own attributes over-liberally on him.
She looked at me, leaning back in her chair, and remained motionless and mute.
Lie down and finish out the night, since you are here; but, for Heaven’s sake!
I cried out that he would frighten the child into fits, and ran to rescue him.
I suppose they were below, for he exclaimed quickly: “Don’t stand there, love!
Does he niver say nowt of his fine living amang us, when he goes to t’ Grange?
Fit to cry, I took an orange from my pocket, and offered it to propitiate him.
I did not want him to yield, though I could not help being afraid in my heart.
“Nelly Dean,” said he, “I can’t help fancying there’s an extra cause for this.
“Are we to try any measures for overtaking and bringing her back,” I inquired.
“They remind me of soft thaw winds, and warm sunshine, and nearly melted snow.
“Why, man,” I exclaimed, facing him angrily, “this is not a place to sleep in.
The consequence was, that it did not reach her before the lapse of three days.
Hindley wanted some water, and I handed him a glass, and asked him how he was.
He could not stand a steady gaze from her eyes, though they were just his own.
“Oh, he’ll do very well,” said the master to me, after watching them a minute.
And he’ll never be able to emerge from his bathos of coarseness and ignorance.
Could she think it was to deny her a pleasure that she might harmlessly enjoy?
“Then you believe I care more for my own feelings than yours, Cathy?” he said.
He’s as strong now as when he first came into the north; I’m positive of that.
devil!—I’ll kill you—I’ll kill you!’

Joseph uttered his croaking laugh again.
You smile; but why do you look so lively and interested when I talk about her?
You would imagine I was the devil himself, Miss Linton, to excite such horror.
“Papa wants us to be married,” he continued, after sipping some of the liquid.
That was yesterday—I said they were mine, too; and tried to get them from her.
Mr. Green took upon himself to order everything and everybody about the place.
I did pity her then, I’m sure: still I didn’t wish to lose my place, you know.
Mrs. Heathcliff was seated by the bedside, with her hands folded on her knees.
“And she got a chair for herself, and placed it at a distance from both of us.
He might have stuck a knife into her neck, she started round in such a taking.
“He’s just like a dog, is he not, Ellen?” she once observed, “or a cart-horse?
But poor Hareton, the most wronged, was the only one who really suffered much.
“I’ve told Missis often my opinion about the child, and Missis agreed with me.
I half believed her; for I felt indeed only bad feelings surging in my breast.
“And won’t you be sorry to leave poor Bessie?”

“What does Bessie care for me?
The whole conversation ran on the breakfast, which one and all abused roundly.
We had to walk two miles to Brocklebridge Church, where our patron officiated.
I knew you would be: you will get on whether your relations notice you or not.
Is he generally liked?”

“Oh, yes; the family have always been respected here.
Three he laid aside; the others, when he had examined them, he swept from him.
It would be intolerable to me to pass a whole evening tête-à-tête with a brat.
Céline’s chamber-maid entered, lit a lamp, left it on the table, and withdrew.
“Miss Ingram!” exclaimed Mrs. Fairfax, and away she hurried to her post below.
Lady Ingram thought it “le cas” to wring her hands: which she did accordingly.
One of the ladies ran to him directly; she seized his arm: it was Miss Ingram.
I had heard Mr. Rochester assign him an apartment below—what brought him here!
There!—Carter has done with you or nearly so; I’ll make you decent in a trice.
“Yes, Bessie,” said I, after I had kissed her; “and I trust I am not too late.
Bessie had retained her quick temper as well as her light foot and good looks.
Well did I remember Mrs. Reed’s face, and I eagerly sought the familiar image.
My tears had risen, just as in childhood: I ordered them back to their source.
I hated it the first time I set my eyes on it—a sickly, whining, pining thing!
I looked at it; I smiled at the speaking likeness: I was absorbed and content.
She passed about five minutes each day in her mother’s sick-room, and no more.
I never go over to Ireland, not having myself much of a fancy for the country.
and how like quarried marble was his pale, firm, massive front at this moment!
It was a grovelling fashion of existence: I should never like to return to it.
Yet, for a long time, I treated you distantly, and sought your company rarely.
If at my individual convenience I might break them, what would be their worth?
I touched the heath: it was dry, and yet warm with the heat of the summer day.
I saw a lizard run over the crag; I saw a bee busy among the sweet bilberries.
I felt it would be degrading to faint with hunger on the causeway of a hamlet.
I could hardly tell how men and women in extremities of destitution proceeded.
I was seized with shame: my tongue would not utter the request I had prepared.
It is much too far away: and were it within a yard of me, what would it avail?
She bustled about, examining me every now and then with the corner of her eye.
“Why, she can’t be above seventeen or eighteen years old, St. John,” said she.
“Yet if I know nothing about you or your history, I cannot help you,” he said.
Our natures dovetailed: mutual affection—of the strongest kind—was the result.
I mean, that human affections and sympathies have a most powerful hold on you.
He insisted, too, on my coming the next day to spend the evening at Vale Hall.
I am not a pagan, but a Christian philosopher—a follower of the sect of Jesus.
“You don’t know him—don’t pronounce an opinion upon him,” I said, with warmth.
“Consent, then, to his demand is possible: but for one item—one dreadful item.
Jane, you would not repent marrying me—be certain of that; we must be married.
Long since you ought to have crushed it: now you should blush to allude to it.
The Impossible—i.e., my marriage with St. John—was fast becoming the Possible.
His nature was not changed by one hour of solemn prayer: it was only elevated.
Oh, I will come!” I flew to the door and looked into the passage: it was dark.
I seem to have received, with full force, the blow I had been trying to evade.
A more resolute, indefatigable pioneer never wrought amidst rocks and dangers.
His own words are a pledge of this—

“My Master,” he says, “has forewarned me.
“Get it ready, will you?” was the answer, uttered so savagely that I started.
Heathcliff is my daughter-in-law,” said Heathcliff, corroborating my surmise.
I see this house will never do for me—look at t’ poor lad, he’s fair choking!
“I’m not going to endure the persecutions of your hospitable ancestors again.
Mr. Linton, sir, don’t lay by your gun.’ ‘No, no, Robert,’ said the old fool.
To-day, Edgar Linton has asked me to marry him, and I’ve given him an answer.
“I have a right to kiss her, if she chooses; and you have no right to object.
I want you to be aware that I know you have treated me infernally—infernally!
CHAPTER XV
Another week over—and I am so many days nearer health, and spring!
With straining eagerness Catherine gazed towards the entrance of her chamber.
“Very well, Miss!” I exclaimed, concealing my joy under an angry countenance.
“Papa is gone to fetch my cousin from London: my cousin is a gentleman’s son.
“She’s fond of you already; and mind you don’t grieve her by crying to-night.
But he had sense to postpone complaining: there might be compensation within.
I mounted Minny, and urged her to a trot; and so my brief guardianship ended.
She did not mention the visit that night, because she did not see Mr. Linton.
you’ll have to fetch the key, or else I must run round to the porter’s lodge.
He was immediately seized by a suffocating cough that soon ended his triumph.
“And give him my thanks for permitting you to come—my best thanks, Catherine.
She thinks Catherine haughty, and does not like her, I can guess by her talk.
“But wisht, old man, and read your Bible like a Christian, and never mind me.
Go with Mrs. Dean, and keep with her; and confine your insolence to her ears.
His eyes met mine so keen and fierce, I started; and then he seemed to smile.
coming, like most other favours long deferred and often wished for, too late!
The superintendent rose—

“I have a word to address to the pupils,” said she.
“Oh, it is no trouble; I dare say your own hands are almost numbed with cold.
I am a little deaf,” returned the good lady, approaching her ear to my mouth.
She will be glad: nobody here understands her: Madame Fairfax is all English.
I envy you your peace of mind, your clean conscience, your unpolluted memory.
“Est-ce que ma robe va bien?” cried she, bounding forwards; “et mes souliers?
Good-night.”

CHAPTER XV
Mr. Rochester did, on a future occasion, explain it.
She was one of the ladies who sang: a gentleman accompanied her on the piano.
The thing delivering such utterance must rest ere it could repeat the effort.
It could not have lasted more than two hours: many a week has seemed shorter.
Mr. Rochester took it, leaving room, however, for me: but I stood before him.
I was so hurt by her coldness and scepticism, that the tears rose to my eyes.
),—or rather, not I, but one Jane Rochester, a person whom as yet I knew not.
He had a rounded, muscular, and vigorous hand, as well as a long, strong arm.
At the churchyard wicket he stopped: he discovered I was quite out of breath.
I had a charming partner—pure, wise, modest: you can fancy I was a happy man.
It was yet night, but July nights are short: soon after midnight, dawn comes.
In crossing a field, I saw the church spire before me: I hastened towards it.
There has been a beggar-woman—I declare she is not gone yet!—laid down there.
Sometimes, when the day was very unfavourable, his sisters would expostulate.
God directed me to a correct choice: I thank His providence for the guidance!
Keenly, I fear, did the eye of the visitress pierce the young pastor’s heart.
You own the name and renounce the alias?”

“Yes—yes; but where is Mr. Briggs?
He is right to choose a missionary’s career—I see it now.”

“They are coming!
Rochester is not there; and if he were, what is, what can that ever be to me?
I cannot accept on His behalf a divided allegiance: it must be entire.”

“Oh!
Your words are such as ought not to be used: violent, unfeminine, and untrue.
He asked, he urged, he claimed the boon of a brand snatched from the burning.
I contended with my inward dimness of vision, before which clouds yet rolled.
They rose expectant: eye and ear waited while the flesh quivered on my bones.
And there was the silence of death about it: the solitude of a lonesome wild.
I am glad to be so near you again.”

“Jane Eyre!—Jane Eyre,” was all he said.
He broke out suddenly while clasping me in his arms—

“Cruel, cruel deserter!
His chastisements are mighty; and one smote me which has humbled me for ever.
Hindley is a detestable substitute—his conduct to Heathcliff is atrocious—H.
“I had the misfortune to scream in my sleep, owing to a frightful nightmare.
She was not one that would have disturbed the house much on her own account.
He’s exactly like the son of the fortune-teller that stole my tame pheasant.
Nonsense!’ cried the dame; ‘Miss Earnshaw scouring the country with a gipsy!
In my soul and in my heart, I’m convinced I’m wrong!”

“That’s very strange!
I am too weak to read; yet I feel as if I could enjoy something interesting.
He looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as a more suitable place for him.
Earnshaw invited me, when I called this morning.”

Mr. Earnshaw invited him!
I’ll crush his ribs in like a rotten hazel-nut before I cross the threshold!
“I’m nearly distracted, Nelly!” she exclaimed, throwing herself on the sofa.
On ascending to Isabella’s room, my suspicions were confirmed: it was empty.
I never would have banished him from her society as long as she desired his.
I just hope, I pray, that he may forget his diabolical prudence and kill me!
My history is dree, as we say, and will serve to while away another morning.
“I wish I could hold you,” she continued, bitterly, “till we were both dead!
Nay, if you nurse anger, that will be worse to remember than my harsh words!
Mr. Heathcliff, meeting me one day in the village, inquired where she lived.
I opened the wicket and ran to the door, knocking vehemently for admittance.
“How long am I to wait?” I continued, disregarding the woman’s interference.
and both times together you have seen Linton hardly four hours in your life!
“I’m sorry I hurt you, Linton,” she said at length, racked beyond endurance.
And I’m certain Linton would recover quickly if he had me to look after him.
“The worst-tempered bit of a sickly slip that ever struggled into its teens.
‘Take her there if she comes to see thee: thou shalln’t keep me out of this.
Mr. Linton was alarmed and distressed, more than he would acknowledge to me.
Catherine, contented at first, in a brief space grew irritable and restless.
And what excuse have you to offer for taking such liberties with the garden?
“Nelly, there is a strange change approaching; I’m in its shadow at present.
I was now nearly sick from inanition, having taken so little the day before.
Do you know?”

“I believe; I have faith: I am going to God.”

“Where is God?
Adèle sang the canzonette tunefully enough, and with the naïveté of her age.
I thought half the time in such a place would have done up any constitution!
I suppose I have all my limbs and all my features like any other man?”

“Mr.
Go, then, Jane; go!” But he still retained my hand, and I could not free it.
Bessie Leaven had said I was quite a lady; and she spoke truth—I was a lady.
What had occurred since, calculated to change his and my relative positions?
Its second rising displayed a more elaborately prepared scene than the last.
The materials are all prepared; there only wants a movement to combine them.
It is my intention to write shortly and desire her to come to me at Madeira.
I am, Madam, &c., &c.,
“JOHN EYRE, Madeira.”

It was dated three years back.
It seemed natural: it seemed genial to be so well loved, so caressed by him.
I had expected his arrival before tea; now it was dark: what could keep him?
I wanted to feel the thoughts whose force he seemed breasting and resisting.
Her family wished to secure me because I was of a good race; and so did she.
While the rain descends so, must I lay my head on the cold, drenched ground?
It was full of the fragrance of new bread and the warmth of a generous fire.
My skill, greater in this one point than theirs, surprised and charmed them.
“Papa says you never come to see us now,” continued Miss Oliver, looking up.
Her call at the school was generally made in the course of her morning ride.
Starved and tired enough he was: but he looked happier than when he set out.
He has told me I am formed for labour—not for love: which is true, no doubt.
I could resist St. John’s wrath: I grew pliant as a reed under his kindness.
“How little did I dream that Hindley would ever make me cry so!” she wrote.
The cowardly children crept nearer also, Isabella lisping—‘Frightful thing!
By that time her ankle was thoroughly cured, and her manners much improved.
I prognosticate for myself an obstinate cold, at least.”

“I hope not, sir.
I love all his looks, and all his actions, and him entirely and altogether.
“We’re dismal enough without conjuring up ghosts and visions to perplex us.
“How long is it since I shut myself in here?” she asked, suddenly reviving.
“I’m not in her confidence,” returned I, reluctant to continue the subject.
I wish to see my bed-room.”

“Bed-rume!” he repeated, in a tone of mockery.
Or will you be my friend, as you have been hitherto, and do what I request?
To think how Mr. Linton charged me to keep you in; and you stealing off so!
If the lad swore, he wouldn’t correct him: nor however culpably he behaved.
And then, I thought, how ever will that weakling live at Wuthering Heights?
“I shall ask him what he wants first,” I said, in considerable trepidation.
I’ll pit him against that paltry creature, unless it bestir itself briskly.
“That is not my cousin, is he?”

“Yes,” he, replied, “your mother’s nephew.
I have nothing to regret; he would have more than any, but I, are aware of.
And what do you suppose the master will think when I display it before him?
“Ho, Miss Linton!” cried a deep voice (the rider’s), “I’m glad to meet you.
He’ll never let his friends be at ease, and he’ll never be at ease himself!
“And be here again next Thursday,” continued he, shunning her puzzled gaze.
It’s a sad pity of that likely young lass, and cant Nelly Dean.’ He stared.
or we should be sitting in flaming fagots, I suppose,” retorted the singer.
Shoo wer niver soa handsome, but what a body mud look at her ’bout winking.
I cannot look down to this floor, but her features are shaped in the flags!
“Must I close this?” I asked, in order to rouse him; for he would not stir.
Scarcely dared I answer her; for I feared the next sentence might be rough.
She was pretty too, if my recollections of her face and person are correct.
Yes, his enemies were the worst: they shed blood they had no right to shed.
CHAPTER IX
But the privations, or rather the hardships, of Lowood lessened.
Assuredly, pleasant enough: but whether healthy or not is another question.
What is God?”

“My Maker and yours, who will never destroy what He created.
“What dog is this?”

“He came with master.”

“With whom?”

“With master—Mr.
“And was that the head and front of his offending?” demanded Mr. Rochester.
The contrast struck me at the time and—”

Adèle here came running up again.
There was a candle burning just outside, and on the matting in the gallery.
I did not know he was out.”

“Oh, he set off the moment he had breakfasted!
Did I forbid myself to think of him in any other light than as a paymaster?
She approached her face to the palm, and pored over it without touching it.
What does that grave smile signify?”

“Wonder and self-congratulation, sir.
And signs, for aught we know, may be but the sympathies of Nature with man.
The next day Bessie was sent for home to the deathbed of her little sister.
She said I oppressed her by leaning over the bed, and again demanded water.
Say, Edward—give me my name—Edward—I will marry you.”

“Are you in earnest?
Try and keep Mr. Rochester at a distance: distrust yourself as well as him.
Grace Poole bent over the fire, apparently cooking something in a saucepan.
“Not in your sense of the word, but in mine you are scheming to destroy me.
You are not to suppose that I desired perfection, either of mind or person.
Rochester, I no more assign this fate to you than I grasp at it for myself.
I dared to put off the mendicant—to resume my natural manner and character.
A kind of pleasant stupor was stealing over me as I sat by the genial fire.
I’m like to look sharpish.”

I maintained a grave silence for some minutes.
Diana looked and spoke with a certain authority: she had a will, evidently.
“At any rate, it makes us no worse off than we were before,” remarked Mary.
“It will be a change for me to visit you now and then; and I like a change.
You see, I mistrust you still, though you have borne up wonderfully so far.
Natural affection only, of all the sentiments, has permanent power over me.
He perhaps knows more of Mr. Rochester than you do.”

“Briggs is in London.
You know the rest.” Again he was going, but I set my back against the door.
“Did I not say you neglected essential points to pursue trifles?” he asked.
Or who, that ever was truly called, believed himself worthy of the summons?
You have lost your labour—you had better go no farther,” urged the monitor.
I looked with timorous joy towards a stately house: I saw a blackened ruin.
Yes: for her restoration I longed, far more than for that of my lost sight.
I knew of what he was thinking, and wanted to speak for him, but dared not.
“I thank my Maker, that, in the midst of judgment, he has remembered mercy.
A quiet wedding we had: he and I, the parson and clerk, were alone present.
Diana’s husband is a captain in the navy, a gallant officer and a good man.
We made ourselves as snug as our means allowed in the arch of the dresser.
I’m now quite cured of seeking pleasure in society, be it country or town.
He died quietly in his chair one October evening, seated by the fire-side.
Young Earnshaw was altered considerably in the three years of his absence.
CHAPTER VII
Cathy stayed at Thrushcross Grange five weeks: till Christmas.
“I didn’t!” she cried, recovering her speech; “I did nothing deliberately.
Edgar persevered in his resolution as far as the court; there he lingered.
She was absent such a while that Joseph proposed we should wait no longer.
We made a sad parting; but Catherine’s tears were more powerful than ours.
Heathcliff’s come back—he is!” And she tightened her embrace to a squeeze.
why is he staying at Wuthering Heights, the house of a man whom he abhors?
But don’t notice it further: I wished to punish her sauciness, that’s all.
The other, I felt certain, recalled it often in the course of the evening.
“Fair means!” she said, in answer to her husband’s look of angry surprise.
That will be a prompt way of finishing all, when I am pushed to extremity!
The down is flying about like snow.”

I went here and there collecting it.
“You’d rather hear nothing about it, I suppose, then, Mr. Linton?” said I.
I have it from good authority that last night (and a pretty night it was!)
“Here’s a rahm,” he said, at last, flinging back a cranky board on hinges.
“Well, he wishes to see you,” said I, guessing her need of an interpreter.
But, for all that, I was not going to sympathise with him—the brute beast!
I wouldn’t have aided or abetted an attempt on even his life for anything.
“I shall have a pretty story to tell to-night; and so you’ve found me out.
At length her suspense was ended: the travelling carriage rolled in sight.
Between his father and Hareton, what playmates and instructors they’ll be.
Come, I reflected, his father’s selfishness may contribute to his comfort.
Come, Nelly, hold your tongue—it will be a treat for her to look in on us.
His tone and look assured her he had not been the discoverer of the hoard.
Two or three months since, were you not in the habit of writing to Linton?
It’s so cold!”

I stirred up the cinders, and fetched a scuttleful myself.
“You ought to come, because you have hurt me: you know you have extremely!
It was not to amuse myself that I went: I was often wretched all the time.
It’s odd what a savage feeling I have to anything that seems afraid of me!
She stepped close up; her black eyes flashing with passion and resolution.
Before he could attempt to recover it, it was broken, and behind the fire.
I did not hear him re-enter, and in the morning I found he was still away.
Or was the vault under the chancel of Gateshead Church an inviting bourne?
I looked over the regulations, and I find no such meal as lunch mentioned.
I was now on a level with the crow colony, and could see into their nests.
He lost his elder brother a few years since.”

“His elder brother?”

“Yes.
I shook him, but he only murmured and turned: the smoke had stupefied him.
I shall do very well on the sofa in the library for the rest of the night.
“You have saved my life: I have a pleasure in owing you so immense a debt.
“He is not to them what he is to me,” I thought: “he is not of their kind.
Mr. Rochester led in Miss Ingram; she was complimenting him on his acting.
“Yes, sir.”

“And dressed?”

“Yes.”

“Come out, then, quietly.”

I obeyed.
You can’t travel a mile without that, I know, in this damned cold climate.
Oh, for some good spirit to suggest a judicious and satisfactory response!
If one shook hands, for instance; but no—that would not content me either.
I wish, Jane, I were a trifle better adapted to match with her externally.
think of other subjects, and speak of other things, and in another strain.
I seldom saw her alone, and had very little private conversation with her.
“Impatiently I waited for evening, when I might summon you to my presence.
I declared I could not change: you tell me to my face I shall change soon.
Through that I departed: it, too, I shut; and now I was out of Thornfield.
Aid!—direct me!”

My glazed eye wandered over the dim and misty landscape.
You have done your duty in excluding, now let me do mine in admitting her.
Oliver, the proprietor of a needle-factory and iron-foundry in the valley.
“Have you found your first day’s work harder than you expected?” he asked.
But he curbed it, I think, as a resolute rider would curb a rearing steed.
He responded neither by word nor movement to the gentle advances made him.
She was first transfixed with surprise, and then electrified with delight.
That is just as fixed as a rock, firm set in the depths of a restless sea.
Since you won’t ask the governess’s name, I must tell it of my own accord.
A name casually written on a slip of paper has enabled me to find her out.
He had calculated on these first objections: he was not irritated by them.
I demanded a quarter of an hour to think, before I again hazarded a reply.
I had silently feared St. John till now, because I had not understood him.
I sincerely, deeply, fervently longed to do what was right; and only that.
Who would be hurt by my once more tasting the life his glance can give me?
I could find it nowhere but at the inn, and thither, ere long, I returned.
He groped his way back to the house, and, re-entering it, closed the door.
Don’t tell me so—lest I should say something disparaging to your judgment.
I began sometimes to pray: very brief prayers they were, but very sincere.
I listened to Mr. Rochester’s narrative, but made no disclosure in return.
I know what it is to live entirely for and with what I love best on earth.
I began to feel unmistakably out of place in that pleasant family circle.
I’ll just fetch a little sewing, and then I’ll sit as long as you please.
“You should not have spoken to him!” she expostulated with Master Linton.
“Frances is quite right: she’ll be perfectly well by this time next week.
As the girl had anticipated, the child Hareton fell wholly into my hands.
“He’s in the barn, I’ve no doubt.”

I went and called, but got no answer.
About seven days ago he sent me a brace of grouse—the last of the season.
I was sweeping the hearth, and I noticed a mischievous smile on her lips.
“Your worthless friend!” I answered, warmly: “the sneaking rascal yonder.
It was enough to try the temper of a saint, such senseless, wicked rages!
I’m sure I should be myself were I once among the heather on those hills.
“Shall you and I be friends, Hareton?” was my next essay at conversation.
But do you imagine that I shall leave Catherine to his duty and humanity?
You say she never mentions my name, and that I am never mentioned to her.
Will you say twenty years hence, ‘That’s the grave of Catherine Earnshaw?
He opened the mysteries of the Fairy Cave, and twenty other queer places.
“How strange that he should never come to see mamma and me!” he murmured.
I entered; Linton was lying on the settle, and half got up to welcome me.
“My father is very ill,” she said; “and why am I called from his bedside?
Heathcliff glanced at me a glance that kept me from interfering a moment.
I’m not going to nurture her in luxury and idleness after Linton is gone.
I appeared to feel the warm breath of it displacing the sleet-laden wind.
He coloured up at the news, and cast his eyes over his hands and clothes.
You see, Mr. Lockwood, it was easy enough to win Mrs. Heathcliff’s heart.
He opened the door immediately, and said—“Nelly, come here—is it morning?
They say he is like Fielding: they talk of his wit, humour, comic powers.
The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea, I believed to be marine phantoms.
Yet in what darkness, what dense ignorance, was the mental battle fought!
We were ascending the avenue when he thus paused; the hall was before us.
I, indeed, talked comparatively little, but I heard him talk with relish.
He seemed surprised—very inconsistently so, as he had just told me to go.
Again she looked at me; and with the same scrutinising and conscious eye.
“Warm and steady,” was his remark: he turned the key and opened the door.
I brought a chair to the bed-head: I sat down and leaned over the pillow.
“It passes me!” she continued; “but no doubt it is true since you say so.
I wish he would come!” I exclaimed, seized with hypochondriac foreboding.
I should fear even to cross his path now: my view must be hateful to him.
But I looked neither to rising sun, nor smiling sky, nor wakening nature.
What shall I do?”

“Oh, I’ll warrant you know where to go and what to do.
“To speak truth, St. John, my heart rather warms to the poor little soul.
I established one for boys: I mean now to open a second school for girls.
“What then, Die?” he replied, maintaining a marble immobility of feature.
I considered; my life was so wretched, it must be changed, or I must die.
What happy combination of the planets presided over her birth, I wonder?)
When I colour, and when I shake before Miss Oliver, I do not pity myself.
I now clapped my hands in sudden joy—my pulse bounded, my veins thrilled.
While the driver and Hannah brought in the boxes, they demanded St. John.
It is the cause of God I advocate: it is under His standard I enlist you.
“This is not thy deception, nor thy witchcraft: it is the work of nature.
I never saw her myself; but I’ve heard Leah, the house-maid, tell of her.
Vinegar-faced Joseph projected his head from a round window of the barn.
Is that it?”

Perceiving myself in a blunder, I attempted to correct it.
But the hour came, at last, that ended Mr. Earnshaw’s troubles on earth.
I wonder his mother does not rise from her grave to see how you use him.
No, she felt small trouble regarding any subject, save her own concerns.
I’ll ring: she’ll be delighted to find me capable of talking cheerfully.
Did he finish his education on the Continent, and come back a gentleman?
I observed that Mr. Edgar had a deep-rooted fear of ruffling her humour.
They were too much absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer embarrassment.
Their guest did not protract his stay that evening above an hour longer.
I made him promise he’d never shoot a lapwing after that, and he didn’t.
That’s what you’ll come to fifty years hence: I know you are not so now.
“Don’t you see that face?” she inquired, gazing earnestly at the mirror.
I inquired whether I might call the maid, and be conducted to a bedroom!
I had better luck: he passed on, entered his chamber, and shut the door.
The more the worms writhe, the more I yearn to crush out their entrails!
If his servants oppose me, I shall threaten them off with these pistols.
But here is Kenneth; I’ll go down, and tell him how much better you are.
Who’s given us the slip now, do you think?”

“Who?” I asked in a flurry.
“And why are they bright so long after it is evening here?” she pursued.
“I’m dreadfully grieved at you, Miss Cathy: you’ve done extremely wrong!
Do say yes: to that clump of birches at the turn!”

I refused staunchly.
All three entered, and mounted to the library, where tea was laid ready.
“And what are you?” inquired Catherine, gazing curiously on the speaker.
“Yes, yes,” answered he: “but is this the only time you have beheld him?
come upstairs—I’m sick!”

I obeyed her summons, and accompanied her out.
He grasped the handle of the door, and shook it: it was fastened inside.
Unable to reply, except passionately, I got up and walked from the room.
Heathcliff knew he could plead eloquently for Catherine’s company, then.
Mr. Heathcliff advanced, and lifted him to lean against a ridge of turf.
It is not I who will make him hateful to you—it is his own sweet spirit.
“Joseph had gone,” she continued, “but I thought proper to bide at home.
And afterwards she furnished me with the sequel of Heathcliff’s history.
“I’ll go to hell, body and soul, before I look sideways after you again.
“Are you staying to talk?” And he approached to execute his own command.
Mr. Kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what disorder the master died.
My walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the direction of the kirk.
Come, Bessie, we will leave her: I wouldn’t have her heart for anything.
“Do you feel as if you should sleep, Miss?” asked Bessie, rather softly.
Your Missis has not been my friend: she has been my foe.”

“O Miss Jane!
How we longed for the light and heat of a blazing fire when we got back!
“I dare say you are clever, though,” continued Bessie, by way of solace.
Fairfax!” I called out: for I now heard her descending the great stairs.
I had hardly ever seen a handsome youth; never in my life spoken to one.
He bowed, still not taking his eyes from the group of the dog and child.
Can you play?”

“A little.”

“Of course: that is the established answer.
I scarcely think the notion that flittered across my brain was an error.
Every good, true, vigorous feeling I have gathers impulsively round him.
The two proud dowagers, Lady Lynn and Lady Ingram, confabulate together.
Not that I ever suffered much from them; I took care to turn the tables.
She did not stoop towards me, but only gazed, leaning back in her chair.
“Bless you!—I knew you would come!” exclaimed Mrs. Leaven, as I entered.
More than ten days elapsed before I had again any conversation with her.
Rochester sitting there, a book and a pencil in his hand; he is writing.
Janet, by-the-bye, it was you who made me the offer.”

“Of course I did.
Cheer up, Dick!—never fear me!—I’d almost as soon strike a woman as you.
Mr. Eyre has been the Funchal correspondent of his house for some years.
All, you know, is prepared for prompt departure: to-morrow you shall go.
I don’t know what sphynx-like expression is forming in your countenance.
“Yet I could not live alone; so I tried the companionship of mistresses.
I had to deceive a fine ear: for aught I knew it might now be listening.
Thus lodged, I was not, at least at the commencement of the night, cold.
Had I nothing about me I could offer in exchange for one of these rolls?
Answering her compassionate gaze with a smile, I said—“I will trust you.
She is mine—I am hers—this present life and passing world suffice to me.
As His disciple I adopt His pure, His merciful, His benignant doctrines.
“I thought Medusa had looked at you, and that you were turning to stone.
Good-night.”

He was lifting the latch: a sudden thought occurred to me.
How he calls aloud a name, and drops his burden, and gazes on it wildly!
What loss, besides mortar and marble and wood-work had followed upon it?
I cannot see, but I must feel, or my heart will stop and my brain burst.
The world may laugh—may call me absurd, selfish—but it does not signify.
“Well, Mr. Earnshaw,” she cried, “I wonder what you’ll have agait next?
I began to dream, almost before I ceased to be sensible of my locality.
“Catherine Linton,” it replied, shiveringly (why did I think of Linton?
Was not the Reverend Jabez Branderham akin to you on the mother’s side?
But a minute’s reflection convinced me it was not my ghostly Catherine.
One fine summer morning—it was the beginning of harvest, I remember—Mr.
The difference between him and the others forced me to be less partial.
“Who is that?” he asked, hearing some one approaching the stairs’-foot.
I thought she was going mad, and I begged Joseph to run for the doctor.
His upright carriage suggested the idea of his having been in the army.
Edgar had made a slop in his saucer, and scarcely swallowed a mouthful.
“With him: and I won’t be always sent off!” she continued, kindling up.
Mrs. Linton, who was very much excited, bade me accompany her upstairs.
“Oh, I will die,” she exclaimed, “since no one cares anything about me.
Ah, they put pigeons’ feathers in the pillows—no wonder I couldn’t die!
And that insipid, paltry creature attending her from duty and humanity!
“Now,” I continued, “read it.” She drew away her hand, and let it fall.
“I must—Linton will be up immediately,” persisted the alarmed intruder.
I wonder Edgar did not send for a constable, and give him into custody!
Don’t you think Hindley would be proud of his son, if he could see him?
“There’s nothing the matter but laziness; is there, Earnshaw?” he said.
“Papa told me; and papa does not tell falsehoods,” she answered pertly.
The moment Catherine left Mr. Linton’s room she appeared at my bedside.
The man took his charge stealthily across the grass towards the stable.
I hadn’t breath to explain; dragging her in, I looked about for Linton.
“It may be very possible that I should love her; but would she love me?
“Did she come to Wuthering Heights because she hated you?” I continued.
“But when I look for his father in his face, I find her every day more!
I thought I had cured you of laughing.”

“It was me,” muttered Hareton.
No, almost nothing—very much excited, and wild, and glad!” she replied.
He cannot be in bed, I thought: those showers would drench him through.
We buried him, to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood, as he wished.
I don’t very well know what I did with my hands, but he called me “Rat!
“She never did so before,” at last said Bessie, turning to the Abigail.
“Well, nurse, how is she?”

Bessie answered that I was doing very well.
How fragrant was the steam of the beverage, and the scent of the toast!
“Barbara,” said she, “can you not bring a little more bread and butter?
No Gytrash was this,—only a traveller taking the short cut to Millcote.
The traveller waited and watched for some time, and at last he laughed.
You had better change your frock now; I will go with you and fasten it.
I found Adèle peeping through the schoolroom door, which she held ajar.
“Surely she cannot truly like him, or not like him with true affection!
Some parleying was audible in the hall, and soon the new-comer entered.
“Let her come—it will be excellent sport!”

The footman still lingered.
I should wish now to protract this moment ad infinitum; but I dare not.
My pulse stopped: my heart stood still; my stretched arm was paralysed.
Why did he so quietly submit to the concealment Mr. Rochester enforced?
At last I looked up at the tardy speaker: he was looking eagerly at me.
Soon after, Mrs. Reed grew more composed, and sank into a dozing state.
you will find it scarcely more legible than a crumpled, scratched page.
I have no kindred to interfere.”

“No—that is the best of it,” he said.
Now you are small—not one whit bigger than the end of my little finger.
“Perhaps it may be got over—explained away?”

“Hardly,” was the answer.
Mr. Mason, a West India planter and merchant, was his old acquaintance.
“Farewell, my darling Adèle!” I said, as I glanced towards the nursery.
It plained of its gaping wounds, its inward bleeding, its riven chords.
Their parents then (the farmer and his wife) loaded me with attentions.
Mr. Oliver spoke of Mr. Rivers—of the Rivers family—with great respect.
You give me a larger allowance of sympathy than I have a just claim to.
“Leave your book a moment, and come a little nearer the fire,” he said.
His eye, bent on me, expressed at once stern surprise and keen inquiry.
You are killing me now.”

His lips and cheeks turned white—quite white.
The crows sailing overhead perhaps watched me while I took this survey.
Great and exalted deeds are what he lives to perform.”

“But his brain?
“What questions, Mr. Rochester?”

Then followed this cross-examination.
“I should not care if you did, Mr. Heathcliff; she richly deserves it.
“Oh, I’ll turn the talk on my landlord’s family!” I thought to myself.
I beg pardon for asking; but I should like to hear how she is!”

“Mrs.
And how did you like the master?”

“A rough fellow, rather, Mrs. Dean.
There was Heathcliff, by himself: it gave me a start to see him alone.
They see us at church, you know, though we seldom meet them elsewhere.
I hope he will not die before I do!”

“For shame, Heathcliff!” said I.
Apparently taking up another subject, she recommenced in a short time.
As soon as you become Mrs. Linton, he loses friend, and love, and all!
girt idle seeght!” demanded the old man, looking round for Heathcliff.
Hahsomdiver, t’ maister “ull play t’ devil to-morn, and he’ll do weel.
“It wants twenty minutes, sir, to taking the medicine,” she commenced.
“Well, well,” cried her husband, crossly, “don’t strangle me for that!
That’s maister, yeah knaw, ’at ’s soa up o’ going tuh t’ grand ’sizes.
Did she come across you on purpose?”

“What is it to you?” he growled.
Because I’m weak, my brain got confused, and I screamed unconsciously.
“You knew your mistress’s nature, and you encouraged me to harass her.
At that earnest appeal he turned to her, looking absolutely desperate.
“‘Nay, it’s enough that he has murdered one of you,’ I observed aloud.
“Walk down stairs at once, and repeat to your master what I have said.
What a shame of your mother, never to waken your filial regard for me!
Heathcliff, it’s very wrong,” I continued: “you know you mean no good.
I bid her be cautious lest she got a fall, and she nimbly disappeared.
“How could you lie so glaringly as to affirm I hated the ‘poor child’?
Give me another.” Catherine pushed another to him, and wiped her face.
Our host hurried out instantly: he had his wits about him; we had not.
He answered, I must try to endure it another hour, and they went away.
My own sweet little mistress sprang on my neck sobbing, “Ellen, Ellen!
Perhaps your envy counselled Mr. Heathcliff to rob me of my treasures?
No sweeping and dusting, only good fire and dry sheets were necessary.
I shook my head reprovingly, and then she blushed and whispered—“Well!
I did not retire to rest till late, and when I did, I could not sleep.
You need only look at yourself in a glass to see how you require both.
I stepped across the rug; he placed me square and straight before him.
I wish it did: she has to answer to Mr. Brocklehurst for all she does.
I and Adèle went to the table; but the master did not leave his couch.
CHAPTER XIV
For several subsequent days I saw little of Mr. Rochester.
Que c’est beau!” and then remained absorbed in ecstatic contemplation.
It was near one before the gentlemen and ladies sought their chambers.
She had evidently been a handsome woman, and was well preserved still.
Mary was too slim for her height, but Blanche was moulded like a Dian.
Amy and Louisa, return to your nests like a pair of doves, as you are.
And why, now, was he so tame under the violence or treachery done him?
drink!”

Mr. Mason obeyed, because it was evidently useless to resist.
“Yet,” said she, “I am afraid it is a mistake: my thoughts deceive me.
or is there no one in the room but you?”

I assured her we were alone.
I was not present to close her eyes, nor were either of her daughters.
And he had spoken of Thornfield as my home—would that it were my home!
Do you think Miss Ingram will not suffer from your dishonest coquetry?
On sleeping, I continued in dreams the idea of a dark and gusty night.
Never fear that I wish to lure you into error—to make you my mistress.
You already know what she was, and how my liaison with her terminated.
Giacinta was unprincipled and violent: I tired of her in three months.
I did not give utterance to this conviction: it was enough to feel it.
You fling me back on lust for a passion—vice for an occupation?”

“Mr.
“Farewell, kind Mrs. Fairfax!” I whispered, as I glided past her door.
I had a small silk handkerchief tied round my throat; I had my gloves.
I tried to walk again: I dragged my exhausted limbs slowly towards it.
I could comprehend the feeling, and share both its strength and truth.
Looking up as I drew near—“You have a question to ask of me?” he said.
“Now,” said he, “that little space was given to delirium and delusion.
“My heart is mute,—my heart is mute,” I answered, struck and thrilled.
I, too, do not want a sister: a sister might any day be taken from me.
“This is you, Mary, is it not?”

“Mary is in the kitchen,” I answered.
this is practical—this is real!” he cried: “I should never dream that.
He entered on the path he had marked for himself; he pursues it still.
Heathcliff,” I said earnestly, “you must excuse me for troubling you.
“Is he not rich enough to keep the estate in good order?” I inquired.
Fasting and reflection seemed to have brought him to a better spirit.
After the usual carols had been sung, we set them to songs and glees.
“All sinners would be miserable in heaven.”

“But it is not for that.
She laughed, and held me down; for I made a motion to leave my chair.
“I want to speak to him, and I must, before I go upstairs,” she said.
“But what did you mean by teasing the creature in that manner, Cathy?
The apparition had outstripped me: it stood looking through the gate.
you are come, are you, Edgar Linton?” she said, with angry animation.
There was a bare possibility of overtaking them if pursued instantly.
He is clearly on the verge of madness: he was so last night at least.
To whom should she mention me if I am a forbidden topic in the house?
“Yes, she’s dead!” I answered, checking my sobs and drying my cheeks.
And how the devil did you come to fasten me out, you toothless hound?
“Nay,” said the servant, “don’t be hard on the bonny lass, Mrs. Dean.
May we not go a little way—half a mile, Ellen, only just half a mile?
The Heights were Heathcliff’s land, and he was reproving the poacher.
I presume you grew weary of the amusement and dropped it, didn’t you?
Had you been brought up in his circumstances, would you be less rude?
I went in; Earnshaw was there also, but he quitted the room directly.
We discerned Linton watching at the same spot he had selected before.
Be calm and frank, and confess at once all that weighs on your heart.
Heathcliff approached the fire, where my mistress and I stood silent.
But Linton requires his whole stock of care and kindness for himself.
“I thought it had been your cousin Hareton,” I observed to Catherine.
By that means, it could not fall to Mr. Heathcliff should Linton die.
But the master bid him get off to bed again: we didn’t want his help.
It wur hard to gie up my awn hearthstun, but I thowt I could do that!
I don’t care for striking: I can’t take the trouble to raise my hand!
I have to remind myself to breathe—almost to remind my heart to beat!
“Yes, sir.”

“Do you read your Bible?”

“Sometimes.”

“With pleasure?
Speak I must: I had been trodden on severely, and must turn: but how?
I took a book—some Arabian tales; I sat down and endeavoured to read.
Impossible now to remain longer by myself: I must go to Mrs. Fairfax.
And she is laying by: she goes every quarter to the bank at Millcote.
Blanche and Mary were of equal stature,—straight and tall as poplars.
She is standing alone at the table, bending gracefully over an album.
Mr. Rochester entered, and with him the surgeon he had been to fetch.
“Stop!” exclaimed Mrs. Reed, “there is another thing I wished to say.
“Yes, sir.”

“And there is room enough in Adèle’s little bed for you.
His whole face was colourless rock: his eye was both spark and flint.
Yet as little could he endure that a son of his should be a poor man.
He was certain his possessions were real and vast: he made inquiries.
With less sin I might have—But let me remember to whom I am speaking.
The air was like sulphur-steams—I could find no refreshment anywhere.
On a stile in Hay Lane I saw a quiet little figure sitting by itself.
I said my evening prayers at its conclusion, and then chose my couch.
Mr. Rochester was safe: he was God’s, and by God would he be guarded.
It burnt on, however, quite steadily, neither receding nor advancing.
It isn’t likely.”

“Do let me speak to your mistresses.”

“No, not I.
Had he been a statue instead of a man, he could not have been easier.
My refusals were forgotten—my fears overcome—my wrestlings paralysed.
How I looked forward to catch the first view of the well-known woods!
The lawn, the grounds were trodden and waste: the portal yawned void.
“Yes, yes: he is alive; but many think he had better be dead.”

“Why?
Mr. Rochester now tried to walk about: vainly,—all was too uncertain.
The tone in which the words were said revealed a genuine bad nature.
I shut it, and took up another and another, till I had examined all.
Then I told her to hush, and not stir, for fear she should wake him.
His cake and cheese remained on the table all night for the fairies.
That is the method I like; and you must finish it in the same style.
Mr. Edgar seldom mustered courage to visit Wuthering Heights openly.
What were the use of my creation, if I were entirely contained here?
“And I want some living creature to keep me company in my happiness!
“I do,” she answered, “but he needn’t resort to whining for trifles.
“Tell us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it,” said I.
Still, I must write to somebody, and the only choice left me is you.
I cannot resist going up with this every night, and trying his door.
“She’s all nerves, and she couldn’t bear the surprise, I’m positive.
would you like to live with your soul in the grave?”

“Let me alone.
CHAPTER XVII
That Friday made the last of our fine days for a month.
He took her education entirely on himself, and made it an amusement.
He will go on, if I leave the window open a bit late in the evening.
“And what shall I do when papa and you leave me, and I am by myself?
Cathy stole to his room to inquire how he was; he had fallen asleep.
We should never quarrel, should we after we were used to each other?
If we had been mad enough to order that proceeding, we had not time.
I’m stalled of doing naught; and I do like—I could like to hear her!
I wish to stay all night.”

“T’ maister!” she cried in astonishment.
This violence is all most repulsive:” and so, no doubt, she felt it.
“I have to thank her for this sprain.”

The widow looked bewildered.
How could you make them look so clear, and yet not at all brilliant?
Open their bleared lids and look on your own accursed senselessness!
He comes in last: I am not looking at the arch, yet I see him enter.
So far estranged, that I did not expect him to come and speak to me.
I have just one word to say of the whole tribe; they are a nuisance.
“I should say the preference lies with you,” responded Colonel Dent.
The dowagers Ingram and Lynn sought solace in a quiet game at cards.
“What can possess him to come home in that style?” said Miss Ingram.
“Now, now, good people,” returned Miss Ingram, “don’t press upon me.
“Are you up?” asked the voice I expected to hear, viz., my master’s.
I watched her drop asleep, and when I left her, I sought the garden.
You think wrong!—I have as much soul as you,—and full as much heart!
You—you strange, you almost unearthly thing!—I love as my own flesh.
It was a burning shame and a scandalous disgrace to act in that way.
“I keep telling her I am not married, and do not explain to her why.
It was not my original intention to deceive, as I have deceived you.
I saw I had strayed far from the village: it was quite out of sight.
You are not what you ought to be, or you wouldn’t make such a noise.
I wondered what he sought there: his words soon explained the quest.
Physically, she far excelled me: she was handsome; she was vigorous.
Not to deceive myself, I must reply—No: I felt desolate to a degree.
She had been indulged from her birth, but was not absolutely spoilt.
I am not brutally selfish, blindly unjust, or fiendishly ungrateful.
I then wrote to Mrs. Fairfax, entreating information on the subject.
He continued—

“God and nature intended you for a missionary’s wife.
Where there is energy to command well enough, obedience never fails.
I shall expect your clear decision when I return this day fortnight.
His father had purchased the estate for the sake of the game covers.
This is her shape—this is her size—”

“And this her voice,” I added.
He carried her in; I followed, grumbling execrations and vengeance.
“By heaven and hell, you’ve sworn between you to murder that child!
She beat Hareton, or any child, at a good passionate fit of crying.
The return of sunshine was welcomed by answering sunshine from him.
“They humour you: I know what there would be to do if they did not.
“To hear you, people might think you were the mistress!” she cried.
I have found that you can be as stoical as anyone, when you please.
Shake your head as you will, Nelly, you have helped to unsettle me!
“You won’t give me a chance of life, you mean,” she said, sullenly.
I didn’t know that, to humour her, I should wink at Mr. Heathcliff.
Then says he, ‘There’s somebody gone after ’em, I guess?’ I stared.
I loved her long ago, and was wretched to lose her; but it is past.
“You shall not, I tell you.”

“For one hour,” he pleaded earnestly.
We parted unreconciled, you remember, and I sha’n’t forgive myself.
“Yesterday, you know, Mr. Earnshaw should have been at the funeral.
If we were neither of us cowards, we might combine to discharge it.
I departed to my own room, marvelling that I had escaped so easily.
Time brought resignation, and a melancholy sweeter than common joy.
However, it must be acknowledged, she had faults to foil her gifts.
While they exchanged caresses I took a peep in to see after Linton.
He had grown tall of his age, still wanting some months of sixteen.
“And you are my uncle, then!” she cried, reaching up to salute him.
Earnshaw had his countenance completely averted from his companion.
I’ve taught him to scorn everything extra-animal as silly and weak.
“I swear Linton is dying,” repeated Heathcliff, looking hard at me.
Master Heathcliff, much irritated, asserted her relation was false.
I’m older than he is, you know, and wiser: less childish, am I not?
I only told him to leave my horse alone, or else it would kick him.
An indefinite alteration had come over his whole person and manner.
The spiteful thing wouldn’t let me: she pushed me off, and hurt me.
Come along.”

“Good-bye, Ellen!” whispered my dear little mistress.
so intimate that I think it strange you won’t come and speak to me.
I distinguished a moor-sheep cropping the short turf on the graves.
I had neither to climb the gate nor to knock—it yielded to my hand.
The way you’ve passed these three last days might knock up a Titan.
With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy: happy at least in my way.
“She has screamed out on purpose,” declared Abbot, in some disgust.
Still, I like Charles—I respect him—I pity him, poor murdered king!
My couch had no thorns in it that night; my solitary room no fears.
What do you mean by it?”

“Sir, I was too plain; I beg your pardon.
Miss Mary declared she felt, for her part, she never dared venture.
I took a soft black pencil, gave it a broad point, and worked away.
I got over the stile without a word, and meant to leave him calmly.
A fortnight of dubious calm succeeded my return to Thornfield Hall.
Is there anything wrong?”

“No, but I thought you would never come.
“Is it because you have the prospect of a journey before you, Jane?
I am her brother.”

“At Thornfield Hall!” ejaculated the clergyman.
It was a snowy day, I recollect, and you could not go out of doors.
I was in my room; the door was ajar: I could both listen and watch.
“It was because I felt and knew this, that I resolved to marry you.
I had no solace from self-approbation: none even from self-respect.
My rest might have been blissful enough, only a sad heart broke it.
The light was yet there, shining dim but constant through the rain.
My very shoes and stockings were purified and rendered presentable.
I was brought up a dependent; educated in a charitable institution.
Last night, or rather this morning, I was dancing till two o’clock.
Well might she put the question: his face was blanched as her gown.
Miss Oliver already honoured me with frequent visits to my cottage.
I wrote again: there was a chance of my first letter having missed.
For them he has no use: I retain them.”

“You cannot—you ought not.
That you have done so, I regret—for your sake.”

I interrupted him.
The darkness of natural as well as of sylvan dusk gathered over me.
and I are going to rebel—we took our initiatory step this evening.
His treatment of the latter was enough to make a fiend of a saint.
Catherine’s cup was never filled: she could neither eat nor drink.
Heathcliff, why don’t you evince satisfaction at my pleasant news?
In old days this would win you knighthood!” exclaimed Mrs. Linton.
A cold blast rushed through; I closed it, and returned to my post.
I cannot recognise any sentiment which those around share with me.
However, that is not to the present purpose—there are other rooms.
Heathcliff, I’ll ask you to do nothing; but sit still and be dumb.
‘I’ll do you a kindness in spite of yourself, and Hareton justice!
And you needn’t trouble your head to screen me; Catherine is gone.
“Who is his master?” continued the tiresome girl, appealing to me.
I don’t know him.”

“Oh, all children love their parents,” I said.
“I feared I should have to come down and fetch my property myself.
Therefore Catherine was thrown on her own resources for amusement.
“Where is the use of the devil in that sentence?” tittered Linton.
Mr. Heathcliff purposely avoids me: I have hardly seen him at all.
and why have you asked me to hang her picture over your fireplace?
“Is it half-an-hour now, Ellen?” she whispered in my ear, at last.
Catherine, Catherine, I’m a traitor, too, and I dare not tell you!
It was growing dark—we heard a sound of voices at the garden-gate.
Catherine had risen with an impulse to dash out, when she saw him.
“Of dissolving with her, and being more happy still!” he answered.
You may laugh, if you will; but I was sure I should see her there.
And what will all her learning and her daintiness do for her, now?
I had never remarked there before; and he looked sparer in person.
The grey church looked greyer, and the lonely churchyard lonelier.
Poor lad!” he added, with a groan; “he’s witched: I’m sartin on’t.
We shall have a fine explosion on the head of it: see if we don’t!
I listened, and tossed about, and, finally, dressed and descended.
“Don’t you think Gateshead Hall a very beautiful house?” asked he.
I now busied myself in preparations: the fortnight passed rapidly.
If you have got your feet well warmed, I’ll show you your bedroom.
“Yes, and she just used to say it in this way: ‘Qu’avez vous donc?
He went on as a statue would, that is, he neither spoke nor moved.
well, come forward; be seated here.” He drew a chair near his own.
“It is from the master,” said she, as she looked at the direction.
Colonel Dent and Mr. Eshton argue on politics; their wives listen.
“My dearest, don’t mention governesses; the word makes me nervous.
As he moved, a chain clanked; to his wrists were attached fetters.
Rise, Miss Eyre: leave me; the play is played out’.”

Where was I?
“But under such circumstances, what could one do?” returned Mason.
I shall certainly return if all be well.”

“And who goes with you?
“Sit up!” said she; “don’t annoy me with holding the clothes fast.
Rochester won’t: though there is so much room in the new carriage.
How would a white or a pink cloud answer for a gown, do you think?
I suppose, then, your heart has been weeping blood?”

“Well, Jane!
There you shall live a happy, and guarded, and most innocent life.
“On a frosty winter afternoon, I rode in sight of Thornfield Hall.
I must struggle on: strive to live and bend to toil like the rest.
As soon as I was out of sight of his house, I sat down and ate it.
Towards morning it rained; the whole of the following day was wet.
He imagined my recovery would be rapid enough when once commenced.
“Good evening!” he repeated, in a voice low and hollow as an echo.
Know me to be what I am—a cold hard man.”

I smiled incredulously.
And then it is such a bitter night—the keenest wind you ever felt.
You are certain of that?”

You are altogether a human being, Jane?
He is good and great, but severe; and, for me, cold as an iceberg.
I flung her back, and hastened to interpose the table between us.
I’m sorry I disturbed you.”

“Oh, God confound you, Mr. Lockwood!
To beard a magistrate in his stronghold, and on the Sabbath, too!
“Did she say she was grieved?” he inquired, looking very serious.
“Sit still, Mrs. Dean,” I cried; “do sit still another half-hour.
There’s the very prime of the morning gone long before that time.
“Oh, Edgar, Edgar!” she panted, flinging her arms round his neck.
His first words revealed that he did not clear his wife of blame.
Three minutes’ delay will render it involuntary and ignominious.'
And not to give me one hint of how she has been these three days!
Ah, I thought myself, she might recover, so waited on as she was.
He is scarcely a degree dearer to her than her dog, or her horse.
The two, to a cool spectator, made a strange and fearful picture.
A great addition, in my eyes, was his being left without an heir.
I dare not stay, lest that notion should possess his wicked head!
“No, Heathcliff’s a tough young fellow: he looks blooming to-day.
And I was better to-day: and there—” his voice died in a whimper.
Are you truly stronger, Linton, than when we separated in winter?
“I’ll be here next Thursday,” she cried, springing to the saddle.
I promise to marry Linton: papa would like me to: and I love him.
A sudden sense of relief flowed from my heart through every limb.
The train-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of sight in a minute.
Hareton wishes you would read to us, ma’am,’ I said, immediately.
How all my brain was in tumult, and all my heart in insurrection!
or was I so worthless as to have grown tired of her pure society?
Presently she said, in the sweetest tone—

“How comfortable I am!
“Where are you going now, Mrs. Fairfax?” for she was moving away.
It was moonlight and gaslight besides, and very still and serene.
Tongues of flame darted round the bed: the curtains were on fire.
“I am glad I happened to be awake,” I said: and then I was going.
The door remained shut; darkness only came in through the window.
Adèle brought her stool to my feet; ere long she touched my knee.
She entered into a discourse on botany with the gentle Mrs. Dent.
“He rode Mesrour (the black horse), did he not, when he went out?
John died yesterday was a week, at his chambers in London.”

“Mr.
Two-thirds of my income goes in paying the interest of mortgages.
She would not be burdened with her society for any consideration.
I was going back to Thornfield: but how long was I to stay there?
“Then I must go:—you have said it yourself.”

“No: you must stay!
On waking, a gleam dazzled my eyes; I thought—Oh, it is daylight!
I felt an inward power; a sense of influence, which supported me.
It was only my station, and the rank of my wife, that you valued?
“I do,” extricating myself from restraint rapidly and completely.
How hard it was to reiterate firmly, “I am going.”

“Jane!”

“Mr.
Not one thought was to be given either to the past or the future.
“He hadn’t time, bairn: he was gone in a minute, was your father.
More desolate, more desperate than ever, it seemed from contrast.
His tall figure sprang erect again with a start: he said nothing.
He had not imagined that a woman would dare to speak so to a man.
Jane, I shall watch you closely and anxiously—I warn you of that.
“Then I must speak for it,” continued the deep, relentless voice.
Especially I felt this when I made any attempt to propitiate him.
He wishes you to go to India?”

“Yes.”

“Madness!” she exclaimed.
The inquiry was put in gentle tones: he drew me to him as gently.
I could not conceive or believe: it was more like an inspiration.
And you were kidnapped by wicked sailors and brought to England.
will you tell her that I’ll come, if she’ll promise not to talk.
The event of this evening has reconciled me to God and humanity!
“All, all is against me: she has blighted my single consolation.
He can girn a laugh as well ’s onybody at a raight divil’s jest.
I thought—or should die soon!—supposing it were a sign of death!
Edgar Linton had his head laid on the pillow, and his eyes shut.
It struck me directly she must have started for Penistone Crags.
“Come, come, there’s a good child,” I whispered, leading him in.
Nelly, if you be tired you may sit down; if not, get home again.
And, to begin my kindness, Joseph, bring the lad some breakfast.
“Wah!” answered Joseph, “yon dainty chap says he cannut ate ’em.
“I’m tired of running, and the ground is dewy: I can’t sit here.
“I am afraid, Nelly, I shall lose my labour,” he muttered to me.
I’m really extremely angry; only I’m so pleased I can’t show it!
Can I do you any good?”

“Why didn’t you come before?” he asked.
I hate you now!” she panted, and her face grew red with passion.
“I’m not to re-enter it without you!”

“Stop!” cried his father.
Once in your own room, I’ll not come near you: you needn’t fear.
There was a talk of two or three minutes, and he returned alone.
At seven o’clock he came, and inquired if Miss Linton had risen.
As to your money, she does not even know that you will have any.
I was sure she was with me, and I could not help talking to her.
you have not heard of Heathcliff’s death, I see,” she continued.
It was enough if he were obliged to see her once or twice a day.
“And who ordered you to obey her?” he added, turning to Hareton.
“I have neither a fear, nor a presentiment, nor a hope of death.
“Well, is he coming?” cried Catherine, when her cousin returned.
He was better, and would be left alone; so the doctor went away.
What a face he had, now that it was almost on a level with mine!
“I thought,” I continued, “Thornfield belonged to you.”

“To me?
No feature in the scene was extraordinary, but all was pleasing.
“Yes, plainly: I often hear her: she sews in one of these rooms.
“Madam, I should like some tea,” was the sole rejoinder she got.
Leah shook her head, and the conversation was of course dropped.
I knew their names afterwards, and may as well mention them now.
I have suffered a martyrdom from their incompetency and caprice.
“Bridewell!” exclaimed Colonel Dent, and the charade was solved.
He bowed to Lady Ingram, as deeming her the eldest lady present.
“I am sure she is something not right!” they cried, one and all.
I cannot remember detecting gratitude in his face.”

“Detecting!
But for the moonlight they would have been in complete darkness.
Then he approached Mason, whom the surgeon was already handling.
He too looked down at the crape round his hat and replied—

“Mr.
I wish I had only offered you a sovereign instead of ten pounds.
I must wait for my master to give explanations; and so must she.
Do you think I am a Jew-usurer, seeking good investment in land?
I saw you like a speck on a white track, lessening every moment.
I fell, but not on to the ground: an outstretched arm caught me.
I made you talk: ere long I found you full of strange contrasts.
They spoke almost as loud as Feeling: and that clamoured wildly.
I knew where to find in my drawers some linen, a locket, a ring.
My hand moved towards the lock: I caught it back, and glided on.
The dew fell, but with propitious softness; no breeze whispered.
“How could she tell where I had got the handkerchief?” she said.
Here I fell twice; but as often I rose and rallied my faculties.
“There you have a dim and mighty archangel fitly set before you!
I think this is a peculiar case—I must at least examine into it.
On a chair by the bedside were all my own things, clean and dry.
He lifted his gaze, too, from the daisies, and turned it on her.
I discerned he was now neither angry nor shocked at my audacity.
Not his ascendancy alone, however, held me in thrall at present.
His friendship was of value to me: to lose it tried me severely.
I know he would.”

“And yet St. John is a good man,” said Diana.
“You know Thornfield Hall, of course?” I managed to say at last.
Who speaks?”

“Pilot knows me, and John and Mary know I am here.
What could my darling do, I asked, left destitute and penniless?
I had endured, he was certain, more than I had confessed to him.
Literally, I was (what he often called me) the apple of his eye.
It is astonishing how sociable I feel myself compared with him.
He was my late master: that is his portrait over the fireplace.
“What are you doing there, Nelly?”

“My work, Miss,” I replied.
“First and foremost, do you love Mr. Edgar?”

“Who can help it?
Edgar must shake off his antipathy, and tolerate him, at least.
“And how isn’t that nowt comed in fro’ th’ field, be this time?
“Well, close the curtains, Nelly,” she said; “and bring up tea.
And that is the slavering, shivering thing you preferred to me!
Mr. Linton stood looking at her in sudden compunction and fear.
Heathcliff set a trap over it, and the old ones dared not come.
“These are the earliest flowers at the Heights,” she exclaimed.
Beware of uttering one breath of this to any one at the Grange.
How the devil could it be otherwise in her frightful isolation?
“Are you going to listen to her ravings?” I said, passionately.
He has extinguished my love effectually, and so I’m at my ease.
Remember to tell him.”

This hint was enough to bind our hands.
Our doubts were presently decided—even earlier than I expected.
You never had one shadow of substantial sorrow, Miss Catherine.
“Then he would write to you, and there’d never be an end of it.
“She wasn’t as happy as Master: she hadn’t as much to live for.
You especially, the elder; and less sensitive, as it turns out.
Since then, I’ve told Linton he must whisper his bitter things.
“You are sure nobody spoke?”

“Quite sure,” replied his cousin.
I said Heathcliff forced me to go in: which was not quite true.
I put the jug on the banister and hastened to admit him myself.
Hareton looked at his plate, and did not repeat the confession.
“Hold her arms, Miss Abbot: she’s like a mad cat.”

“For shame!
She passed into another ballad, this time a really doleful one.
“No; I should not like to belong to poor people,” was my reply.
“Yes.”

“And how far is it?”

“Fifty miles.”

“What a long way!
By the time that exercise was terminated, day had fully dawned.
“Who is he?”

“The owner of Thornfield,” she responded quietly.
And Mademoiselle—what is your name?”

“Eyre—Jane Eyre.”

“Aire?
Of course not: I need not ask you; because you never felt love.
Strange!” he exclaimed, suddenly starting again from the point.
She came here to a Christmas ball and party Mr. Rochester gave.
Now which of you most resembles Bothwell?” cried Mr. Rochester.
Good-night, my—” He stopped, bit his lip, and abruptly left me.
“Tell her, Sam, a gentleman is coming.”

Sam went and returned.
Rochester,” she made a movement as if tempted to order me away.
Oh, I wish he would cease tormenting me with letters for money!
Meantime, I got on as well as I could with Georgiana and Eliza.
He did not leave the stile, and I hardly liked to ask to go by.
You’re not turning your head to look after more moths, are you?
For man’s opinion—I defy it.”

But what had befallen the night?
“I’ll send her to school yet,” he said, but now he was smiling.
He disavowed nothing: he seemed as if he would defy all things.
Bertha, like a dutiful child, copied her parent in both points.
“My bride’s mother I had never seen: I understood she was dead.
I sought the Continent, and went devious through all its lands.
Looking up, I, with tear-dimmed eyes, saw the mighty Milky-way.
Having crossed the marsh, I saw a trace of white over the moor.
I still possessed my senses, though just now I could not speak.
This place I was obliged to leave four days before I came here.
If in our trio there was a superior and a leader, it was Diana.
St. John looks quiet, Jane; but he hides a fever in his vitals.
As he stood, mute and grave, she again fell to caressing Carlo.
“Quite well,” he enunciated; and, with a bow, he left the gate.
It aroused him; he uncrossed his legs, sat erect, turned to me.
“You certainly shall not go till you have told me all,” I said.
they are coming!” cried Hannah, throwing open the parlour door.
When he said “go,” I went; “come,” I came; “do this,” I did it.
Yes, I can work as hard as he can, and with as little grudging.
He prizes me as a soldier would a good weapon; and that is all.
He is now helpless, indeed—blind and a cripple.”

“Where is he?
And you are not a pining outcast amongst strangers?”

“No, sir!
I no longer felt inclined to call Heathcliff a capital fellow.
They wouldn’t let me go to the end of the garden wall.”

“You!
What else could it be that made me pass such a terrible night?
We laughed outright at the petted things; we did despise them!
When would you catch me wishing to have what Catherine wanted?
Oh, papa, oh!’ They really did howl out something in that way.
Don’t take on, and fret about it too much: it can’t be helped.
It pleases her brother to see us cordial, and that pleases me.
I’m sure she made some speech of the kind; did she not, Ellen?
I was standing by the kitchen-window, but I drew out of sight.
Will you give up Heathcliff hereafter, or will you give up me?
Bonny bird; wheeling over our heads in the middle of the moor.
She was struck during a tempest of passion with a kind of fit.
Any relic of the dead is precious, if they were valued living.
“In what has he wronged you, to warrant this appalling hatred?
Earnshaw,” I continued, “directs me to wait on myself: I will.
Directly after Joseph came up with Hareton, to put him to bed.
She cannot accuse me of showing one bit of deceitful softness.
Go upstairs; I have something to say to Ellen Dean in private.
And dreary, and chill, and dismal, that morrow did creep over!
has been a stranger in the house from last Sunday till to-day.
If God afflict your enemies, surely that ought to suffice you.
don’t let them say such things,” she pursued in great trouble.
“She often talked of uncle, and I learnt to love him long ago.
But I’ll take this walk every morning in future: may I, uncle?
Catherine took a sly look at him, expressing small admiration.
“Get up, you idle boy!” he exclaimed, with assumed heartiness.
and invent bugbear stories to terrify her from my door-stones?
Next to papa and Ellen, I love you better than anybody living.
“I wish she felt as I do,” he replied: “spiteful, cruel thing!
“The Grange is not a prison, Ellen, and you are not my gaoler.
He lay an image of sadness and resignation awaiting his death.
Begone, witch, and get your things!”

She scornfully withdrew.
Having studied Mrs. Linton’s, he said—“I shall have that home.
An afterthought brought me back, when I had quitted the court.
“And he spoke to me,” she added, with a perplexed countenance.
“Yes!” I reflected to myself, “we shall have a fit of illness.
And I exclaimed—“Have you heard any good news, Mr. Heathcliff?
“How can she bear it so quietly—so firmly?” I asked of myself.
“Your directions shall be attended to, sir,” said Miss Temple.
“Here is Miss Eyre, sir,” said Mrs. Fairfax, in her quiet way.
Now place your feet on the stool, to keep them out of the wet.
Poor stupid dupe!—Could not even self-interest make you wiser?
“It gets late,” said Mrs. Fairfax, entering in rustling state.
It does not signify if I knew twenty ways; for he has seen me.
The hour spent at Millcote was a somewhat harassing one to me.
It was he: here he was, mounted on Mesrour, followed by Pilot.
And now, no more sombre thoughts: chase dull care away, Janet.
How fearful were the curses those propensities entailed on me!
I only begged permission to sit down a moment, as I was tired.
The ladies rose; they seemed about to withdraw to the parlour.
Mr. Rivers, whom nothing seemed to escape, noticed it at once.
I took a sheet of fine card-board, and drew a careful outline.
“I am come to see how you are spending your holiday,” he said.
This I know.”

“Strange indeed!” I could not help ejaculating.
What are you going to do?”

“To be active: as active as I can.
Do you hear, Jane?”

“Yes; just as if you were speaking Greek.
I feel I have adequate cause to be happy, and I will be happy.
With some difficulty, I got him to make the tour of the house.
“How far is Thornfield Hall from here?” I asked of the ostler.
Surely, in that case, I should not be so mad as to run to him?
He thought his love slept sweetly: he finds she is stone dead.
“Yes, he is stone-blind, is Mr. Edward.”

I had dreaded worse.
“You are to send in your name and your business,” she replied.
Why should I, when both he and I were happier near than apart?
Do you know that you run a risk of being lost in the marshes?
“He has nobody knows what money, and every year it increases.
Come to the glass, and I’ll let you see what you should wish.
“Are you going anywhere?”

“No, it is raining,” she answered.
“He’s doing his very utmost; but his constitution defies him.
I resumed my song; not having forgotten her recent behaviour.
“No,” she added, after a while; “I cannot sit in the kitchen.
“You are worse than twenty foes, you poisonous friend!”

“Ah!
It will correct you of feigning more valour than you possess.
I never will!”

She paused, and resumed with a strange smile.
I quickly released the animal, and lifted it into the garden.
It’s hard work bringing them through fevers, and such things.
I thought he meant for missis’s sickness, so I answered, yes.
I shall love mine yet; and take him with me: he’s in my soul.
Do you believe such people are happy in the other world, sir?
“One might suppose you had never opened a Bible in your life.
“Ah,” said she, “you are come a-seeking your little mistress!
Poor Linton ran a frightened eye over the faces of the three.
Will you just turn this nab of heath, and walk into my house?
Happily, as Mr. Heathcliff conjectured, he’ll not win twenty.
There now—she’ll lend you her arm: that’s right, look at her.
He’s not dead; Doctor Kenneth thinks he may last another day.
“‘Now—Catherine,’ he said, ‘how do you feel?’

“She was dumb.
Why are you stopping there?’ she cried, in a tone of disgust.
He afterwards gathered the books and hurled them on the fire.
Hareton would not open his fingers, so I laid it on his knee.
“Tak’ these in to t’ maister, lad,” he said, “and bide there.
Come in with your light.”

“It is striking four,” I answered.
CHAPTER I
There was no possibility of taking a walk that day.
“If you don’t sit still, you must be tied down,” said Bessie.
“Miss Jane, take off your pinafore; what are you doing there?
“Go out of the room; return to the nursery,” was her mandate.
People think you a good woman, but you are bad, hard-hearted.
“You may look at it,” replied the girl, offering me the book.
“The Miss Reeds could not play as well!” said she exultingly.
I think she is poor, for she had not so fine a house as mama.
“Approach the table,” said he; and I wheeled it to his couch.
These eyes in the Evening Star you must have seen in a dream.
“Good evening, madam; I sent to you for a charitable purpose.
“Evening approaches,” said I, as I looked towards the window.
At last coffee is brought in, and the gentlemen are summoned.
Because, when she failed, I saw how she might have succeeded.
“Jane, I’ve got a blow; I’ve got a blow, Jane!” He staggered.
The company all stared at me as I passed straight among them.
Take your wages.”

I declined accepting more than was my due.
Have you accepted him?”

“Yes.”

She looked at me bewildered.
No one, who saw us together, would suppose it for an instant.
Have we anything else to stay for?” he inquired of Mr. Mason.
Being unable to sleep in bed, I got up and opened the window.
I tried dissipation—never debauchery: that I hated, and hate.
I seemed to have something like a right to seek counsel here.
I tasted what they offered me: feebly at first, eagerly soon.
I wish I could describe that sermon: but it is past my power.
I cannot even render faithfully the effect it produced on me.
“I shall come up and help you to teach sometimes,” she added.
Rosamond was full of glee and pleasure all the time I stayed.
I abandon to you, then, what is absolutely superfluous to me.
A merry child would have the advantage of him on this hearth.
I am afraid the whole of the ensuing week tried his patience.
In leaving England, I should leave a loved but empty land—Mr.
“Keep to common sense, St. John: you are verging on nonsense.
The one candle was dying out: the room was full of moonlight.
I had heard it—where, or whence, for ever impossible to know!
I might yet once more see the Hall under the ray of her star.
“I’m coming to that, ma’am—that Mr. Edward fell in love with.
he’s mad to speak so!” And he struck his forehead with rage.
The rest of them do earn their bread—you live on my charity!
“A very agreeable portrait,” I observed to the house-keeper.
I’ll teach thee to impose on a good-hearted, deluded father.
He did not contradict me; perhaps he had fallen into a doze.
we separated!” she exclaimed, with an accent of indignation.
However, Catherine would not be persuaded into tranquillity.
I felt some sentiment that it must be a judgment on us also.
I can recollect its chief incidents, as far as she had gone.
“Who has taught you those fine words, my bairn?” I inquired.
“It is in danger of splitting its skull against my knuckles.
why does my blood rush into a hell of tumult at a few words?
Probably she had not touched her dress since yester evening.
and can you compare my feelings respecting Catherine to his?
I guess by her silence, as much as anything, what she feels.
What right—answer me—for the poor fancy you felt for Linton?
only do not leave me in this abyss, where I cannot find you!
Hareton stared up, and scratched his head like a true clown.
She earnestly supplicated that I would spare her one or two.
I can’t forget your words, Ellen; they are always in my ear.
And he’ll soon do as I direct him, with some slight coaxing.
You wouldn’t let any enemy hurt me, if you could prevent it?
Now, Catherine, you are letting your tears fall into my cup.
Catherine, his happiest days were over when your days began.
His letters of advice and consolation entertained me vastly.
She showed herself, as she often was in life, a devil to me!
He said Mrs. Linton was “thrang,” and the master was not in.
There was a restless, anxious expression in his countenance.
“Get off wi’ ye!” he growled, with uncompromising gruffness.
“And you’ll be my friend?” added Catherine, interrogatively.
Taken with another fit of cowardice, I cried out for Joseph.
What a consternation of soul was mine that dreary afternoon!
If they did not love me, in fact, as little did I love them.
I cry because I am miserable.”

“Oh fie, Miss!” said Bessie.
“Jane, you are under a mistake: what is the matter with you?
“Remember directions!” Grace curtseyed silently and went in.
“Have you told master that you heard a laugh?” she inquired.
“They’ll be here in ten minutes.”

Adèle flew to the window.
Colonel Dent was less showy; but, I thought, more lady-like.
She had a slight figure, a pale, gentle face, and fair hair.
And what did you detect, if not gratitude?”

I said nothing.
“Now, sir, what a strange idea!”

“But well carried out, eh?
I should like something else: a little addition to the rite.
Eliza still spoke little: she had evidently no time to talk.
Georgiana and she had nothing in common: they never had had.
But I have no time to gather any; I want to be at the house.
I did not cry so as to be heard, however; I avoided sobbing.
Mr. Rochester sat quiet, looking at me gently and seriously.
Is there not love in my heart, and constancy in my resolves?
“Adèle may accompany us, may she not, sir?”

“I told her no.
all shall bolt out at once, like the bullet from the barrel.
I would rather you had come and upbraided me with vehemence.
I was in the library—sitting in his chair—he was quite near.
What a pigmy intellect she had, and what giant propensities!
A mild-looking, cleanly-attired young woman opened the door.
Move off.”

“But I must die if I am turned away.”

“Not you.
Very soon one of the ladies returned—I could not tell which.
I bethought myself to talk about the school and my scholars.
I, wealthy—gorged with gold I never earned and do not merit!
She was a little small thing, they say, almost like a child.
Oh, till this moment, I thought my little Jane was all mine!
You have not quite forgotten little Adèle, have you, reader?
Wuthering Heights is the name of Mr. Heathcliff’s dwelling.
At least, I would not keep my doors barred in the day-time.
CHAPTER V
In the course of time Mr. Earnshaw began to fail.
I should scarcely have known you: you look like a lady now.
Be quick, and say whether I was wrong!”

“You accepted him!
Mrs. Linton spoke strongly, and yet I can’t contradict her.
“Half a dozen nephews shall erase her title, please heaven!
His abode at the Heights was an oppression past explaining.
Hindley and I held it a favourite spot twenty years before.
“Cathy, this lamb of yours threatens like a bull!” he said.
Do you love that wretch Heath—”

“Hush!” cried Mrs. Linton.
Joseph beheld my style of cookery with growing indignation.
I shall expect you every day—don’t disappoint me!—ISABELLA.
I’ll continue it in her own words, only a little condensed.
There he is,” cried Heathcliff, sinking back into his seat.
Will you ruin her, because she has not wit to help herself?
“‘I’ll not hold my tongue!’ I said; ‘you mustn’t touch him.
Linton sank back on his pillow and fell into a brown study.
“Now, who is that?” asked Mr. Heathcliff, turning to Cathy.
Nelly, you recollect me at his age—nay, some years younger.
“It was because you disliked Mr. Heathcliff,” she answered.
“Aunt Isabella had not you and me to nurse her,” I replied.
Nelly, if you won’t let her go, you can walk over yourself.
It’s something new to hear a voice like yours!” he replied.
To speak of his death so regardlessly wounded her feelings.
“‘Oh, you dunce!’ I said, laughing heartily at his failure.
‘You are so much happier than I am, you ought to be better.
Catherine was too intent on his fingers to notice his face.
I thought he had not heard aught, so I told him the rumour.
“You’d better hold your tongue, now,” he answered fiercely.
I rested my head against a pillow or an arm, and felt easy.
That eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy I had.
I will tell anybody who asks me questions, this exact tale.
She obligingly consented to act as mediatrix in the matter.
Mama used to teach me to dance and sing, and to say verses.
“In what order you keep these rooms, Mrs. Fairfax!” said I.
I had—as I deserved to have—the fate of all other spoonies.
Remain where you are till I return; be as still as a mouse.
I could not tell—I did not know his taste in female beauty.
Gentlemen and ladies alike had quitted their beds; and “Oh!
Gentlemen, have the goodness to set the ladies the example.
Reed was my uncle—my mother’s brother.”

“The deuce he was!
“Yes; I suppose you found that out by second-sight.”

“Mrs.
Mrs. Fairfax received me with her usual plain friendliness.
Do you think I am an automaton?—a machine without feelings?
Have I not found her friendless, and cold, and comfortless?
I suppose your love will effervesce in six months, or less.
When is the pause after that sentence ever broken by reply?
I recognised well that purple face,—those bloated features.
“Go to the devil!” was his brother-in-law’s recommendation.
I see a white cheek and a faded eye, but no trace of tears.
All the men in her circle seemed to admire her and envy me.
“Now, Jane, why don’t you say ‘Well, sir?’ I have not done.
“You see now how the case stands—do you not?” he continued.
I skirted fields, and hedges, and lanes till after sunrise.
And why cannot I reconcile myself to the prospect of death?
A strange place was this humble kitchen for such occupants!
good!” she exclaimed, while her dark and deep eye sparkled.
With a loud long knock, the new-comer appealed to the door.
Diana and Mary appeared in the chamber once or twice a day.
“You should have waited for my leave to descend,” she said.
“Yes.”

She riveted a searching gaze on her brother’s face.
Mary perused it in silence, and returned it to her brother.
John!” I exclaimed, when I had got so far in my meditation.
And there are obstacles in the way: they must be hewn down.
I would not so soon relinquish the attempt to reconquer it.
It bore these words—

“You left me too suddenly last night.
“Answer me—speak again!” he ordered, imperiously and aloud.
I wish you joy, Miss!” and he politely pulled his forelock.
I bowed and waited, thinking she would bid me take a seat.
“A strange choice of favourites!” she observed scornfully.
Mrs. Earnshaw loved the music, and so they gave us plenty.
I don’t care how long I wait, if I can only do it at last.
It is mine, at present; and, therefore, continue minutely.
“Leave the room, Ellen!” she repeated, trembling all over.
All seems smooth and easy: where is the obstacle?”

“Here!
The surprise bewilders me—it will put her out of her head!
He fair likes—he langs to set his brazened face agean ’em!
“I’ve treated you infernally—and you’ll take your revenge!
Let me take care to throw it on the floor when I lie down.
“I thought I was lying in my chamber at Wuthering Heights.
I entreated, and finally attempted to force her to retire.
“That is not true!” exclaimed Linton, rising in agitation.
“The commonest occurrence startles her painfully,” I said.
“You must read it immediately, because it wants an answer.
After all, it is preferable to be hated than loved by him.
If he were a born fool I should not enjoy it half so much.
Well, you dropped Linton with it into a Slough of Despond.
She returned, and asked me to sit with her in the library.
He stopped on observing his error: his cousin flew to him.
He makes them a little more attentive at least,” he cried.
Do you know, Miss Linton, that brute Hareton laughs at me!
“Well, Ellen, I’m so afraid of you being angry,” she said.
“It is late!” he said, speaking short and with difficulty.
Is he pretty lively with Miss Linton generally?”

“Lively?
You can tell her to flit, when you go up; here is the key.
And she won’t give over, though I say I’ll call my father.
I despise you, and will have nothing to say to any of you!
The crown of all my wishes will be the union of those two.
Have done.”

“But you won’t let him strike me?” she cried.
He sat by the corpse all night, weeping in bitter earnest.
I feared nothing but interruption, and that came too soon.
“Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here?” she asked.
“Can it be you, Jane?” she asked, in her own gentle voice.
The horse followed,—a tall steed, and on its back a rider.
She began by felling my horse.”

“Sir?” said Mrs. Fairfax.
Is she a real fortune-teller?” demanded the Misses Eshton.
“If I could do that, simpleton, where would the danger be?
“Hillo!” he cries; and he puts up his book and his pencil.
“We must go in,” said Mr. Rochester: “the weather changes.
Human beings never enjoy complete happiness in this world.
“What is the matter?” he asked; “all the sunshine is gone.
It was a little thing with a veil of gossamer on its head.
And now, as it was long past one, I prepared to leave him.
I was received at the foot of the stairs by Mr. Rochester.
I pursued wanderings as wild as those of the March-spirit.
Just this promise—‘I will be yours, Mr. Rochester.’”

“Mr.
We were born to strive and endure—you as well as I: do so.
Worn out with this torture of thought, I rose to my knees.
A neighbour or two came in; my chair was evidently wanted.
No, that is well: while you draw you will not feel lonely.
Mediocrity, no: do not let envy prompt you to the thought.
Besides, I am resolved I will have a home and connections.
It was then nine o’clock: he did not return till midnight.
“Is she sarcastic, and sarcastic to me!” it seemed to say.
of the breaking up of the frozen sea in their displeasure?
Anything like a tangible reproach gave me courage at once.
Looking through the window, I saw him traverse the garden.
Mr. Rochester often spoke of it, and sometimes went there.
How can it be that Jane is with me, and says she loves me?
Jane!’”

“Did you speak these words aloud?”

“I did, Jane.
And what was it that had suggested the tremendous tumult?
But that’s because I’m used to Edgar and Isabella Linton.
Don’t make more mischief; my brother is coming: be quiet!
Instead of finding her outside, I heard her voice within.
They were “ill eneugh for ony fahl manners,” he affirmed.
And so I had but one choice left: to do as I was ordered.
and the devil teaches you to swear at daddy?” I observed.
“You must answer it; and that violence does not alarm me.
How dreary to meet death, surrounded by their cold faces!
Linton will be sorry?” observed Kenneth, interrogatively.
he’ll break his heart should anything happen!” I replied.
Don’t write, but come, and bring me something from Edgar.
“Who are you?”

“My name was Isabella Linton,” I replied.
I believed, at one time, no lessons could teach her that!
“But if I live, I’ll see you again before you are asleep.
“She’s fainted, or dead,” I thought: “so much the better.
We’re not going to hurt thee, Linton—isn’t that thy name?
“You’ve heard of me, I daresay?”

“No,” he replied again.
“But stay,” he continued, turning towards the young lady.
“Na—ay!” he snarled, or rather screamed through his nose.
Then he thrust me away, and leant his head down silently.
Hareton never touches me: he never struck me in his life.
I exclaimed that he had killed Linton, and I would enter.
That part of his letter was simple, and probably his own.
Catherine will tell you that I—that I—have been cheerful.
“Your beasts have trotted off,” he said, “and—now Linton!
Zillah won’t be here to-night; you must undress yourself.
Having reached the Heights, I rushed eagerly to the door.
And when I slept in her chamber—I was beaten out of that.
who knows what may happen?” said Mr. Lloyd, as he got up.
What strength had I to dart retaliation at my antagonist?
I just put my two arms round her and said, “Come, Bessie!
What an extraordinary sensation that ray sent through me!
She had scarcely finished ere the bell announced bedtime!
Why did I not spend these sweet days of liberty with her?
He intended to have her brought up in ——shire, I believe.
“Oh, at six o’clock: he keeps early hours in the country.
I believe there were some misunderstandings between them.
“Well, leave me:” he relaxed his fingers, and I was gone.
Sense would resist delirium: judgment would warn passion.
Mary was always too sleepy to join in a plot with spirit.
It was Eliezer and Rebecca: the camels only were wanting.
Chance has meted you a measure of happiness: that I know.
How much have you in the world, Jane?” he asked, smiling.
You had no right to be born, for you make no use of life.
Leah smiled, and even Sophie bid me “bon soir” with glee.
I have always noticed that you were a sort of pet of his.
Don’t you hear to what soft whispers the wind has fallen?
One of his lately hired servants, a footman, answered it.
All was still: two shadows only moved in a remote corner.
I leaned my arms on a table, and my head dropped on them.
You shall be Mrs. Rochester—both virtually and nominally.
I never loved, I never esteemed, I did not even know her.
Mr. Rochester, reading my countenance, saw I had done so.
my hope—my love—my life!” broke in anguish from his lips.
Quite as many as there was employment for.”

I reflected.
“My strength is quite failing me,” I said in a soliloquy.
The day after, Diana and Mary quitted it for distant B——.
I drew better than her master in the first school in S——.
John,” I said, “I think you are almost wicked to talk so.
Do you think God will be satisfied with half an oblation?
I saw nothing, but I heard a voice somewhere cry—

“Jane!
I summoned strength to ask what had caused this calamity.
“Her very fingers!” he cried; “her small, slight fingers!
Does that mean a respectable well-conducted man of fifty?
John, when I turned to him, was grinning from ear to ear.
His letter was then calm, and, though very serious, kind.
As to St. John Rivers, he left England: he went to India.
Cannot you tell her whom I am, eh, Joseph?”

“Nor-ne me!
“Is he to have any?” she asked, appealing to Heathcliff.
And Hareton has been cast out like an unfledged dunnock!
I could not guess the use that either would be of, then.
Now, don’t you think the lad would be handsomer cropped?
The expression of her face seemed disturbed and anxious.
That will do to explain my secret, as well as the other.
They were both very attentive to her comfort, certainly.
And yon bonny lad Heathcliff, yah mind, he’s a rare ’un.
“I should be sorry to think so,” returned his companion.
If he did overhear us, of course he’d never forgive you.
“There is nothing in the world the matter,” I whispered.
He’s waiting till I come home that he may lock the gate.
“Speak lower, Mary—What is the matter?” said Mr. Linton.
My slumber was deep and sweet, though over far too soon.
He knocks at the door as if he were master here already!
“‘Get up, and begone out of my sight,’ said the mourner.
“Nay,” he replied, looking down, and blushing bashfully.
you see you have got into pretty company,” I interposed.
“How delightful it will be to have him for a playfellow!
“That the two cousins may fall in love, and get married.
“Oh, give them to me, and I’ll never, never do so again!
“I didn’t tell a tale.”

“And nowhere else?” I demanded.
“I shall not scold, but I don’t like your conduct there.
To sneer at his imperfect attempt was very bad breeding.
“Only Ellen and I were disputing concerning your health.
I’m glad, for I shall be master of the Grange after him.
She continued reading, or seeking for something to read.
Wuthering Heights was the goal of my proposed excursion.
“He told me to begone as fast as I could,” she answered.
I will ask what is the matter, I thought; or who should?
Is the satirist of “Vanity Fair” admired in high places?
“It is Julia Severn,” replied Miss Temple, very quietly.
The governess!” and again my raiment underwent scrutiny.
How long were you there?”

“Eight years.”

“Eight years!
I compared myself with her, and found we were different.
He was talking, at the moment, to Louisa and Amy Eshton.
“No, you men never do consider economy and common sense.
“On my honour, I am much obliged to you,” was the reply.
How will she manage to please him when they are married?
Destiny is not written there.”

“I believe you,” said I.
now you are coming to reality,” I said, as I obeyed her.
It came out of the third storey; for it passed overhead.
It seemed that sleep and night had resumed their empire.
“Have you a sponge in your room?” he asked in a whisper.
And yet I stooped down and kissed her: she looked at me.
“Well, I have twice done you a wrong which I regret now.
They came to tell us the next morning that all was over.
To-morrow,” she continued, “I set out for the Continent.
Little Adèle was half wild with delight when she saw me.
“Jane, do you hear that nightingale singing in the wood?
I beckoned it to come near me; it stood soon at my knee.
“Is that a dream?” said he, placing it close to my eyes.
How his eye shone, still watchful, and yet wild beneath!
Now for vexation, and exasperation, and endless trouble!
Soon I heard him earnestly entreating me to be composed.
No thought could be admitted of entering to embrace her.
By no other circumstance had I will to decide my choice.
I stopped and said—

“Will you give me a piece of bread?
“I cannot tell: I found her at the door,” was the reply.
I thought more o’ th’ childer nor of mysel: poor things!
“You munnut think too hardly of me,” she again remarked.
I do not repine.”

“But you feel solitude an oppression?
and what sort of an effect will the bequest have on you?
How much of the fall of the avalanche is in their anger?
“Jane,” she said, “you are always agitated and pale now.
I thought I had taken a wrong direction and lost my way.
You make me feel as I have not felt these twelve months.
I kept these things then, and pondered them in my heart.
“Come, come,” he said, “you are flurried, Mr. Lockwood.
This was Heathcliff’s first introduction to the family.
You’ll have to seek for her shoes in the bog to-morrow.
‘What prey, Robert?’ hallooed Linton from the entrance.
“Cathy, are you busy this afternoon?” asked Heathcliff.
I know how it is, now, that he is always out of my way.
I, supposing she was going to say something, looked up.
“I’m very far from jesting, Miss Catherine,” I replied.
He’ll be as much to me as he has been all his lifetime.
“Yon lad gets war und war!” observed he on re-entering.
“I’s niver wonder but he’s at t’ bothom of a bog-hoile.
They say Mr. Earnshaw is worse and worse since he came.
Edgar Linton had difficulty in hearing me to the close.
You are aware that I am no way blamable in this matter.
You may fancy a glimpse of the abyss where I grovelled!
Nelly has played traitor,” she exclaimed, passionately.
He did it with a courtesy that redounded to his credit.
I questioned with myself—where must I turn for comfort?
There, pale t’ guilp off, un’ then ye’ll hae done wi’t.
Edgar, in his anxiety for her, forgot her hated friend.
My anger was greater than my astonishment for a minute.
I supposed it one of the maids, and I cried—“Have done!
“Hav’n’t they reared it on snails and sour milk, Nelly?
Though it is something to see you have not white blood.
“I thought I liked you, though you were cross at first.
We calculate it will scarcely last till it is eighteen.
It was the trot of a horse; Cathy’s dance stopped also.
How can you deliberately get up such paltry falsehoods?
“You’ll be content with the cushion, Master Heathcliff.
I never considered what she did with herself after tea.
No Catherine could I discover upstairs, and none below.
And why should you try to deceive me by telling a tale?
I needn’t repeat that, because you would call it silly.
“Go to Linton now, as I told you; and cry at your ease!
A sudden impulse seized me to visit Thrushcross Grange.
And then, to get them jocks out o’ t’ maister’s cellar!
I’d rather have seen him gnash his teeth than smile so.
“Say, ‘What do you want, Master Reed?’” was the answer.
“What, already up!” said he, as he entered the nursery.
let the worst come to the worst, I can advertise again.
There is a high gale in that sky, and on this hill-top.
She entered, transformed as her guardian had predicted.
“Well, Jane, do you know me?” asked the familiar voice.
The fever broke out there, and many of the pupils died.
I can never submit to do that—yet how are we to get on?
How it will answer, I cannot tell: I really don’t know.
Forget visionary woe, and think only of real happiness!
There was a younger brother, too—a complete dumb idiot.
Rochester, I will not be yours.”

Another long silence.
In all likelihood, though, I should die before morning.
Worn out, indeed, I was; not another step could I stir.
I felt ashamed to appear before my benefactors so clad.
She possessed eyes whose gaze I delighted to encounter.
But three of the number can read: none write or cipher.
You ought to marry her.”

“Does she like me?” he asked.
It struck me that his hand looked wasted like his face.
Wondering, and of my wonder finding no end, I complied.
He had held me in awe, because he had held me in doubt.
John, I am unhappy because you are still angry with me.
In that case, my lot would become unspeakably wretched.
During that meal he appeared just as composed as usual.
met my eye like the lineaments of a once familiar face.
The host himself brought my breakfast into the parlour.
Indeed, I should say it was ascertained beyond a doubt.
The other eye inflamed: he lost the sight of that also.
I now drew near and knocked: John’s wife opened for me.
I will be your neighbour, your nurse, your housekeeper.
you are a castaway—be off, or I’ll hurt you seriously!
“‘You forget you have a master here,’ says the tyrant.
I shall not soon forget the effect my action produced.
he’s dead!” And they both set up a heart-breaking cry.
Hindley descended more leisurely, sobered and abashed.
Is she sorry for her shameful conduct?—I asked myself.
I shouldn’t be Mrs. Linton were such a price demanded!
you must not call him by those names, master,” I said.
I pondered this sentence painfully, after he was gone.
He leant on the back of a chair, and covered his face.
“What ails your young lady?”

“She’s gone, she’s gone!
“Now, wilt thou be ganging?” he asked authoritatively.
“That’s a great tempter to a desperate man, is it not?
I wonder he won’t be near me!” She went on to herself.
“‘I shall not meddle in the matter,’ I retorted again.
However, he was not going to rouse him from his sleep.
“Varrah weell!” shouted Joseph, as he slowly drew off.
I watched to catch his impressions in his countenance.
She was a happy creature, and an angel, in those days.
“Well,” said I, “where are your moor-game, Miss Cathy?
And the best of it is, Hareton is damnably fond of me!
“He does not know his letters,” he said to his cousin.
My mother lived till eighty, a canty dame to the last.
“And grief and disappointment are hastening his death.
“How must I arrange it, then?” she asked despairingly.
That’s as mamma used to do, whole afternoons together.
At this diabolical violence I rushed on him furiously.
Besides, that lass owes me her services for her bread.
Nobody loves you—nobody will cry for you when you die!
I watched them, from the window, walk down the garden.
I left him there, and proceeded down the valley alone.
He does his work, eats his food, and sleeps eternally!
We had not sat long thus, when another person came in.
She took her candle, and I followed her from the room.
“Was it your mama who taught you that piece?” I asked.
Nor do I particularly affect simple-minded old ladies.
The three days were, as she had foretold, busy enough.
First, there was Mrs. Eshton and two of her daughters.
“She’s ready now,” said the footman, as he reappeared.
I thought it must be you: there is no one else for it.
You don’t hesitate to take a place at my side, do you?
Will you promise to sit up with me to bear me company?
I have no more money to give him: we are getting poor.
“Must I leave Thornfield?”

“I believe you must, Jane.
I did not observe her at first, nor did Mr. Rochester.
Mr. Rochester had himself written the direction, “Mrs.
So you shun me?—you shut yourself up and grieve alone!
Terrible moment: full of struggle, blackness, burning!
Give one glance to my horrible life when you are gone.
He would send for me in the morning; I should be gone.
I fear I cannot do otherwise: for who will receive me?
“Happen ye’ve been a dressmaker?”

“No, you are wrong.
You think them more profound and potent than they are.
Besides, you must know some day,—as well now as later.
It was now dark; but a rumbling of wheels was audible.
A fine spring shone round me, which I could not enjoy.
All this was torture to me—refined, lingering torture.
you are afraid of yourself,” he said, curling his lip.
The interest you cherish is lawless and unconsecrated.
I so dreaded a reply that would crush me with despair.
Yes, that was ever the hour of fatality at Thornfield.
CHAPTER II
Yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold.
I’ll hae no hend wi’t,” muttered the head, vanishing.
“How must I do?” I continued, with rising irritation.
At first the young man appeared about to befriend me.
What he meant to do with it, and whether he were mad?
Heathcliff, as I thought, walked through to the barn.
Not as long as I live, Ellen: for no mortal creature.
He will, when he learns my true feelings towards him.
CHAPTER X
A charming introduction to a hermit’s life!
You may be certain this grieved more than angered me.
Linton should approve,” returned my lady, decisively.
Mrs. Linton sat down by the fire, flushed and gloomy.
But, Heathcliff, if I dare you now, will you venture?
“No, she’s a sly one,” he remarked, shaking his head.
She is tired of trying to please me uncommonly early.
He’d be capable of coming to seek me, to tease Edgar.
“Of course—he has ordered me to take him,” I replied.
I made no reply, because I saw that he expected none.
Don’t you like him, Ellen?”

“Like him!” I exclaimed.
It’s only a cold that ails him, the same as papa has.
I’m of the busy world, and to its arms I must return.
tell me the meaning of this strange talk, and I will.
While they were thus occupied, our jailor re-entered.
Have you never loved anybody in all your life, uncle?
“Tak’ it,” he added, thrusting the tray into my hand.
I sent Hareton out, and we had the room to ourselves.
Hareton, if I gave you a book, would you take it now?
It is to be carried to the churchyard in the evening.
“What do you want?” I asked, with awkward diffidence.
Eliza, who was headstrong and selfish, was respected.
I cannot endure it—let me be punished some other way!
This book I had again and again perused with delight.
I assure you, I desire to be your friend.”

“Not you.
I have heard of day-dreams—is she in a day-dream now?
“Is it still ‘Rasselas’?” I asked, coming behind her.
I now glanced sideways at this piece of architecture.
“Is it all over?” she asked, looking down at my face.
“How is Helen Burns?”

“Very poorly,” was the answer.
He seemed puzzled to decide what I was; I helped him.
I let down the curtain and went back to the fireside.
Adèle and Mrs. Fairfax drew near to see the pictures.
“I will go, if no better may be; but I don’t like it.
They were all three of the loftiest stature of women.
A considerable interval elapsed before it again rose.
“Here is to your health, ministrant spirit!” he said.
Encroach, presume, and the game is up.”

“Is it, sir?
No, sir, don’t caress me now—let me talk undisturbed.
my experience has been heavenly, if you only knew it!
The solicitor addressed me as he descended the stair.
They showed her to me in parties, splendidly dressed.
At last I hired Grace Poole from the Grimbsy Retreat.
“I am a stranger, without acquaintance in this place.
I reached the house, and knocked at the kitchen-door.
I could see a clock, a white deal table, some chairs.
“You had better tell me what you have to say to them.
“Can we send for any one you know?”

I shook my head.
I examined first, the parlour, and then its occupant.
To this neighbourhood, then, I came, quite destitute.
This grew to force—compressed, condensed, controlled.
What did St. John Rivers think of this earthly angel?
Mr. Rivers, I have been so gay during my stay at S——.
If I offered my heart, I believe you would accept it.
I heard a noise: the wind, I thought, shook the door.
What a cold, loose touch, he impressed on my fingers!
Tell me what business St. John and you have on hands.
“You would not live three months there, I am certain.
I am astonished you found courage to refuse his hand.
The discovery was brought about in the strangest way.
At this moment John approached him from some quarter.
Cheered, as I have said, he was: and yet but by fits.
Is he a person of low stature, phlegmatic, and plain.
She looked pale and thin: she said she was not happy.
Are we going to murder folk on our very door-stones?
With this intention, I turned and opened the panels.
I could not half tell what an infernal house we had.
Oh, that’s not what I intend—that’s not what I mean!
I don’t want to be troubled with more sickness here.
Keep your fingers from that bitter phalanx of vials.
“I cannot rest, Ellen,” she said, by way of apology.
She did laugh as she saw Heathcliff pass the window.
“Who’s your master?”

“Devil daddy,” was his answer.
Daddy cannot bide me, because I swear at him.”

“Ah!
“It is nothing, is it, Ellen Dean?” he said sternly.
Yon’ Heathcliff’s run off wi’ her!” gasped the girl.
Mrs. Linton bent forward, and listened breathlessly.
Hareton and Joseph were probably fast asleep in bed.
And you conspire with him against me, do you, viper?
Mr. Kenneth came to announce the event to my master.
This, however, is not making progress with my story.
“Hallo, Nelly!” said Mr. Heathcliff, when he saw me.
Hareton responded, and presently the two re-entered.
I shook my head, and went meditating into the house.
I gazed round for a means of diverting her thoughts.
I couldn’t succeed till everything she knew was out.
Speak!”

“To the bottom of the park,” she stammered.
he trembles: as if I were really going to touch him!
He only half addressed me, and I maintained silence.
Dunnot say I wanted it, but ask of yourseln.’

“‘Mr.
CHAPTER XXXI
Yesterday was bright, calm, and frosty.
“He is not envious, but emulous of your attainments.
“Con-trary!” said a voice as sweet as a silver bell.
I’ll interfere in no quarrels between you and Nelly.
“I sudn’t shift for Nelly—nasty ill nowt as shoo is.
I have my eyes on it: hardly three feet to sever me!
Well, there is one who won’t shrink from my company!
November, December, and half of January passed away.
They apply to friends, I suppose: I have no friends.
“Now, then, draw nearer to the fire,” she continued.
It was a curious laugh; distinct, formal, mirthless.
No wonder you have rather the look of another world.
I put my request in an absurd, almost insolent form.
But it was not fated that I should sleep that night.
and you walk past me as if we were mutual strangers!
Now you look puzzled; and I will puzzle you further.
No, sir.”

“Shake hands in confirmation of the word.
“I will leave you by yourself, white dream,” I said.
What a bright spot of colour you have on each cheek!
“The devil is in it if you cannot answer distinctly.
At the front door of the hall we found the carriage.
You are passionate: I expected a scene of some kind.
I will keep the law given by God; sanctioned by man.
An old woman opened: I asked was this the parsonage?
The very cultivation surrounding it had disappeared.
“Is it, then, a bonfire just kindled?” I questioned.
“What is the employment you had in view, Mr. Rivers?
They speak with the broadest accent of the district.
A vision, as it seemed to me, had risen at his side.
Rosamond Oliver kept her word in coming to visit me.
My foundation laid on earth for a mansion in heaven?
“No, no!” he responded shortly and somewhat testily.
“You unbend your forehead at last,” said Mr. Rivers.
I thought you were for flying off on some excursion.
I deeply venerated my cousin’s talent and principle.
I had thought I recognised in you one of the chosen.
I asked was it a mere nervous impression—a delusion?
The host was a respectable-looking, middle-aged man.
Then he paused, as if he knew not which way to turn.
When I had done, that name was immediately taken up.
I would not, therefore, immediately charm the snake.
Her frantic joy at beholding me again moved me much.
Mrs. Heathcliff, however, checked me by her answer.
“An awful Sunday,” commenced the paragraph beneath.
‘I’ll demolish the first who puts me out of temper!
How I writhed, and yawned, and nodded, and revived!
You’ve done just right to tell the story leisurely.
“A thousand smiths’ hammers are beating in my head!
Cannot you inform him that it is frightful earnest?
“And that wind sounding in the firs by the lattice.
That is the most diabolical deed that ever you did.
The world is surely not worth living in now, is it?
And he had earthly consolation and affections also.
The naughty thing never made her appearance at tea.
He is in bed, and too tired to go the distance now.
Now, I can neither bear to talk, nor anything else.
“You are not dreaming of it, are you?”

She smiled.
And small loss to his family whenever he drops off.
I can’t tell how he knew of it, unless he listened.
no—he has shown the greatest distress,” I answered.
Nelly Dean is lodged, at this minute, in your room.
I lay a quarter of an hour listening and trembling.
Heathcliff went up once, to show her Linton’s will.
The lands, being a minor, he could not meddle with.
I’ll go upstairs again, if you come near me.’

“Mr.
The fellow is as handsome a rustic as need be seen.
He answered, No; but he would be in at dinner-time.
“All well at the Heights?” I inquired of the woman.
“It is well you are out of my reach,” he exclaimed.
“We wanted to plant some flowers there,” she cried.
It was too late: Heathcliff had caught hold of her.
“Yes, close it,” he replied, in his familiar voice.
The hours crept anxiously by: another evening came.
“What were you doing behind the curtain?” he asked.
“Is she going by herself?” asked the porter’s wife.
Varens is the name of your future pupil.”

“Indeed!
Many, no doubt; and I shall be called discontented.
The subjects had, indeed, risen vividly on my mind.
Too feverish to rest, I rose as soon as day dawned.
Did you not, my lady-mother?”

“Certainly, my best.
The sound of the dressing-bell dispersed the party.
You have not exchanged a syllable with one of them?
“Where the devil is Rochester?” cried Colonel Dent.
Mr. Rochester stood in the gallery holding a light.
“Thank you, sir.”

“Do you like this sunrise, Jane?
There’s sense in the suggestion; not a doubt of it.
John gambles dreadfully, and always loses—poor boy!
I am come to a strange pass: I have heavy troubles.
But what was that to her, or to any one but myself?
“Oh, it is rich to see and hear her!” he exclaimed.
He duly summoned me to his presence in the evening.
But I will not believe it to be anything important.
Rochester, I must leave you.”

“For how long, Jane?
I shall keep only to you so long as you and I live.
I must be aided, and by that hand: and aided I was.
Gentle reader, may you never feel what I then felt!
In an undertone she gave some directions to Hannah.
“You said your name was Jane Elliott?” he observed.
“Show me, show me the path!” I entreated of Heaven.
I heard the front-door open, and St. John pass out.
where meantime was the hapless owner of this wreck?
Mary opened the door for me, and shut it behind me.
He evidently wished no repetition of my intrusion.
And now, guess what your good children were doing?
She’s out of her head for joy, it’s such a beauty!
“I must and shall!” he replied in a subdued voice.
He always contrives to be sick at the least cross!
I had risen in angry rebellion against Providence.
“Begone, for God’s sake, and hide your vixen face!
Ah, he has caught a glimpse of us—he is coming in!
Heathcliff, what are you about, raising this stir?
I’m delightfully rewarded for my kindness to each!
“It’s behind there still!” she pursued, anxiously.
“It cannot be: how has the idea entered your head?
The remainder of the letter is for yourself alone.
Put your handkerchief away—don’t snivel before me.
But he was too good to be thoroughly unhappy long.
The road thither wound close by Wuthering Heights.
“You’ll see me what!” asked Catherine in surprise.
“Ah, I see, some dust on the road—they are coming!
Cathy carried a footstool and her cup to his side.
And you should be glad to go home, and to see him.
“He’ll not venture a single syllable all the time!
“And just send those books I promised to lend him?
It tired me dreadfully writing those long letters.
“But I have been vexed, because you wouldn’t come.
For heaven’s sake, Catherine, don’t look so angry!
“You shall have tea before you go home,” he added.
nothing else in the world: and she shall have you!
there is; though we be in an out-of-the-way place.
He thought of Catherine; for he murmured her name.
Happily, I was spared the journey and the trouble.
The day she was buried, there came a fall of snow.
I feel like death!’

“And she looked like it, too!
I got up and offered her my seat in the arm-chair.
Why was it useless to try to win any one’s favour?
In the course of the morning Mr. Lloyd came again.
And why had I these aspirations and these regrets?
The man, the human being, broke the spell at once.
“Sit,” he said; “the bench is long enough for two.
A strange and solemn object was that corpse to me.
“Do you think I can stay to become nothing to you?
“Explanation will do for another time,” thought I.
I will remand the order I despatched to my banker.
“Let me go,—let me go to Millcote too!” she cried.
“‘Oh,’ returned the fairy, ‘that does not signify!
Those words did not die inarticulate on your lips.
I said I could not while he was in such a passion.
I have a right to deliver myself from it if I can.
“Farewell!” was the cry of my heart as I left him.
I had risen to my knees to pray for Mr. Rochester.
“Will you give me that?” I asked
She stared at me.
Alas, this isolation—this banishment from my kind!
Hannah, the servant, was my most frequent visitor.
“You will not stay at Morton long: no, no!”

“Why?
Rosamond a sufferer, a labourer, a female apostle?
For the rest, whether trite or novel, it is short.
They both threw their arms round his neck at once.
“And what does your heart say?” demanded St. John.
“I was the late Mr. Rochester’s butler,” he added.
There is himself, Earnshaw, Zillah, Joseph and I.
“Take my colt, Gipsy, then!” said young Earnshaw.
Go, say thy prayers, child, and ask God’s pardon.
I imagined her as little likely to die as myself.
“Why have you that silk frock on, then?” he said.
“He hates you—they all hate you—that’s the truth!
He never struck me as such a marvellous treasure.
I asked, as he departed, if he went to Gimmerton?
Oh, I’ve endured very, very bitter misery, Nelly!
No, I’ll swallow the key before you shall get it!
“She has blood on her lips!” he said, shuddering.
“What’s your business here?” he demanded, grimly.
“I shall have my supper in another room,” I said.
If it be achieved, I have cause to return thanks.
I shall be incomparably beyond and above you all.
You loved me—then what right had you to leave me?
The murdered do haunt their murderers, I believe.
“You asked, what has driven me to flight at last?
He didn’t pray for Catherine’s soul to haunt him.
And you will have such nice rambles on the moors.
Before he dismounted, I went and opened the door.
I’d have loved the lad had he been some one else.
The master had retired to rest before we came in.
Don’t let me go home thinking I’ve done you harm.
Now and then I was happy: once in a week perhaps.
I can read yon, now.’

“‘Wonderful,’ I exclaimed.
I’ll either break or burn a way out of the house.
“No, Mr. Lockwood,” said Nelly, shaking her head.
That certainly was a crime: and was I fit to die?
No ill-usage so brands its record on my feelings.
“Never,” I thought; and ardently I wished to die.
I still recoiled at the dread of seeing a corpse.
He said something in praise of your eyes, did he?
I regarded her, of course, with special interest.
“It’s a mere rehearsal of Much Ado about Nothing.
Meantime the moon declined: she was about to set.
“She’s done for me, I fear,” was the faint reply.
The flesh on the shoulder is torn as well as cut.
truant!” he added, when he had paused an instant.
For the world’s judgment—I wash my hands thereof.
I ate what I could, and then I hastened upstairs.
Give her some explanation before I see her again.
“What is the nature of the impediment?” he asked.
I looked at Mr. Rochester: I made him look at me.
I saw hope revive—and felt regeneration possible.
I was vexed with you for getting out of my sight.
You are my sympathy—my better self—my good angel.
The coach is a mile off by this time; I am alone.
for but one mouthful to allay the pang of famine!
Whether it were Greek or German I could not tell.
I knew I was in a small room and in a narrow bed.
“And what business have you here?” she continued.
“What do you disapprove of, Mr. Rivers?” I asked.
He did love me—no one will ever love me so again.
An unsmiling, a searching, a meaning gaze it was.
I felt I became a favourite in the neighbourhood.
For me, I felt at home in this sort of discourse.
That bloodless lip quivered to a temporary spasm.
CHAPTER XXXVIII—CONCLUSION
Reader, I married him.
Without waiting to hear more, I left the kitchen.
Alas, for the effects of bad tea and bad temper!
Brethren, execute upon him the judgment written.
You have reason in shutting it up, I assure you.
“You must not go!” she exclaimed, energetically.
“Miss is dreadfully wayward, sir,” I called out.
“Where’s Heathcliff?” she said, interrupting me.
“Is it worth keeping?” I inquired, less sulkily.
And now, let us hear what you are unhappy about.
Bud he’ll not be soa allus—yah’s see, all on ye!
Mr. Heathcliff has just honoured me with a call.
“I shall think it a dream to-morrow!” she cried.
It lies in your own power to be Edgar’s brother!
“And what do you learn from daddy?” I continued.
“Naught,” said he, “but to keep out of his gait.
Your bliss lies, like his, in inflicting misery.
Am I to lose all, without a chance of retrieval?
“You and Edgar have broken my heart, Heathcliff!
What kind of living will it be when you—oh, God!
“‘I’ll keep him out five minutes,’ he exclaimed.
I snatched it away, however, and seized his arm.
On only one condition can I hope to forgive him.
I inquired of him if he had seen our young lady.
Linton slowly trailed himself off, and lay down.
Hareton, you infernal calf, begone to your work.
He kept his seat, and shrank closer to the fire.
I didn’t!” sobbed Cathy, fit to break her heart.
“That’s too high,” murmured the provoking thing.
“Sit on the settle and let me lean on your knee.
I listened at Mr. Edgar’s door; all was silence.
“Ellen, I was ready to tear my hair off my head!
Ellen, tell him how disgraceful this conduct is.
You who have felt what it is to be so neglected!
It’s mine: papa says everything she has is mine.
How changed I found him, even in those few days!
I couldn’t abide to be present at their meeting.
He gave all the servants but me, notice to quit.
“Do you suppose I dread any change of that sort?
Now, since I’ve seen her, I’m pacified—a little.
you are an exception,’ answered Mrs. Heathcliff.
“Hareton muttered she might go to hell, for him!
“He twitched his shoulder as Juno twitches hers.
Your love will make him an outcast and a beggar.
On my re-entrance, I found Mr. Heathcliff below.
Have you seen something?” again demanded Bessie.
“Is that your mistress, nurse?” asked Mr. Lloyd.
By dying young, I shall escape great sufferings.
“Do the servants sleep in these rooms?” I asked.
I marvelled where you had got that sort of face.
“I think I hear Mrs. Fairfax move, sir,” said I.
I regained my couch, but never thought of sleep.
The sisters were both attired in spotless white.
Yet now, how distant, how far estranged we were!
He had spoken of Mr. Rochester as an old friend.
He swallowed the contents and returned it to me.
Mr. Mason shortly unclosed his eyes; he groaned.
“Is there immediate danger?” murmured Mr. Mason.
An impulse held me fast—a force turned me round.
Sophie!’ I again cried: and still it was silent.
“No, sir, I solemnly assure you to the contrary.
This is a gentle delineation, is it not, reader?
It is not despair of success that keeps me dumb.
You might relinquish that scheme.”

“Relinquish!
One does not jump, and spring, and shout hurrah!
An austere patriot’s passion for his fatherland!
If the reality were required, what should we do?
My heart beat fast and thick: I heard its throb.
Only the last words of the worship were audible.
“I’ll go with him as far as the park,” he said.
“Proud people breed sad sorrows for themselves.
“Yes, and it worries me, and I must let it out!
I want to have one word with her—your mistress.
“Some one mistress does not expect,” I replied.
“Nelly, help me to convince her of her madness.
you’ve done with coming here,” cried Catherine.
“Lie down and shut your eyes: you’re wandering.
Well, it will teach me to be careful next time.
I took it from his hand, and touched the blade.
Will Hathecliff bide sich bonny ways, think ye?
I do hate him—I am wretched—I have been a fool!
“Kiss me again; and don’t let me see your eyes!
he shall buy another, if he gets me back again.
Let the door remain shut, and be quiet!’

“‘No!
would you have tears for him?” said the doctor.
He died true to his character: drunk as a lord.
“Get him something that he can eat, that’s all.
But Linton and I have no share in your quarrel.
And besides, I’m almost seventeen: I’m a woman.
My master requested an account of our ongoings.
You contradict your own words, and distract me!
get up directly!”

“I will, father,” he panted.
I rose to follow, but he turned the lock again.
“Oh,” he cried, “I shan’t tell you where it is.
Nobody, neither Hareton nor Zillah, is to know.
It blew bleak as winter—all round was solitary.
“How do you contrive to live here without them?
“I assure you it is through no settled designs.
“You say you have faults, Helen: what are they?
Sundays were dreary days in that wintry season.
“She is in Miss Temple’s room,” said the nurse.
“May I go up and speak to her?”

“Oh no, child!
I went to my window, opened it, and looked out.
I nearly fell out of mine; it was like a shelf.
And what meaning is that in their solemn depth?
“You,” I said, “a favourite with Mr. Rochester?
“Go!” ejaculated Miss Ingram, and the man went.
I think I rave in a kind of exquisite delirium.
Why did Mr. Rochester enforce this concealment?
God, who does the work, ordains the instrument.
How often had it lowered on me menace and hate!
She seemed to want no company; no conversation.
“It is I, Aunt Reed.”

“Who—I?” was her answer.
It was a discoloured face—it was a savage face.
Am I severed from you by insuperable obstacles?
If I storm, you have the art of weeping.”

“Mr.
Thus, at the age of twenty-six, I was hopeless.
As yet my flight, I was sure, was undiscovered.
This light was my forlorn hope: I must gain it.
Oh, this last hour, approaching in such horror!
“I can but die,” I said, “and I believe in God.
They’ve like nobody to tak’ care on ’em but me.
They all saw the embarrassment and the emotion.
All I see has made me thankful, not despondent.
“Certainly; better than she likes any one else.
I stood motionless under my hierophant’s touch.
I spilt half of what was in the glass,” I said.
My crippled strength!” he murmured regretfully.
Oh, I longed for thee both with soul and flesh!
St. John is unmarried: he never will marry now.
He has been blaming our father (how dared he?)
The four hundred and ninety-first is too much.
Put your trash away, and find something to do.
Hold your tongue, you foul-mouthed thief, you!
Oh, Heathcliff, you are showing a poor spirit!
clear you too quite from my reach and hearing.
“About his work in the stable,” was my answer.
Because, Miss Catherine—”

“He quite deserted!
“Why did you not say so to Catherine?”

“Hush!
I showed another, keeping it out of his reach.
I hope it will not come out when you are gone!
“He’s considering—he’d rather I’d come to him!
I don’t want you, Edgar: I’m past wanting you.
Ye’ve seen all but Hareton’s bit of a cham’er.
You have killed me—and thriven on it, I think.
I twisted the two, and enclosed them together.
I couldn’t count the number of falls I’ve had.
“This is your last ride, till papa comes back.
“No, I shall be your companion there,” I said.
“No,” said Linton, with a gaze of vacant fear.
Why don’t you visit at the Grange with Linton?
You’ll own that I’ve outmatched Hindley there.
“Why cannot you say at once you don’t want me?
Be so kind as to walk home with him, will you?
I would not pass another winter here for much.
“Is Mrs. Dean within?” I demanded of the dame.
“Then you are not afraid of death?” I pursued.
“Tell me why you are so queer, Mr. Heathcliff?
To attack the first is not to assail the last.
The good apothecary appeared a little puzzled.
My eye sought Helen, and feared to find death.
“That is my little boy,” said Bessie directly.
“Good morning, Miss Adela,” said Mrs. Fairfax.
no legends or ghost stories?”

“I believe not.
I felt no fear of him, and but little shyness.
“Now, ma’am, am I a fool?”

“Far from it, sir.
I was your equal at eighteen—quite your equal.
and is she possessed with a devil?” thought I.
“What have you done with me, witch, sorceress?
You are no talking fool: say nothing about it.
“Doesn’t she know?” I heard the woman whisper.
“What beautiful ladies!” cried she in English.
there she is still, behind the window-curtain.
Pardon the seeming paradox; I mean what I say.
She has laid it carefully on one side for you.
Here, Carter, help him on with his waist-coat.
I started at first, and then I approached him.
Will I not guard, and cherish, and solace her?
“Good-morrow, Mrs. Poole!” said Mr. Rochester.
I was talking of removing you from Thornfield.
I pass over the madness about parting from me.
I opened the door, passed out, shut it softly.
But all the surface of the waste looked level.
“Eat that now,” she said: “you must be hungry.
“And what then?” she demanded, in a low voice.
He turned at last, with measured deliberation.
Then I recalled where I was, and how situated.
The veil fell from his hardness and despotism.
You pretend to be shocked by what I have said.
I am an independent woman now.”

“Independent!
Most of the morning was spent in the open air.
Diana and Mary approved the step unreservedly.
Well, it is—swarming with ghosts and goblins!
I was surprised to see Heathcliff there also.
“Where is Miss Catherine?” I cried hurriedly.
The luckless adventure made Earnshaw furious.
“And you told a deliberate untruth!” he said.
“You shall not meddle with him!” I continued.
Was he vexed at my bad humour this afternoon?
And oh, this dearth of the human physiognomy!
Why not have up Mrs. Dean to finish her tale?
“No, to Wuthering Heights,” he answered: “Mr.
He has startled and distressed me shockingly!
The little dog was yelping in the garden yet.
“Whear the divil?” began the religious elder.
But I’m mista’en if ye shew yer sperrit lang.
I nobbut wish he may catch ye i’ that plisky.
She thinks you are all spies for her husband.
you said you cared nothing for my sufferings!
Be with me always—take any form—drive me mad!
And besides, Edgar has not been kind, has he?
I stared full at him, and laughed scornfully.
“But I’ll have it,” he said, “when I want it.
“My father!” he cried, in strange perplexity.
what a lovely, charming thing!” he exclaimed.
I’ll inform you of its whole scope,” he said.
Don’t you like him!”

Catherine looked queer.
“Nor anything at all, then, my lady?” I said.
You deserved, both of you, flogging for that!
I endeavoured to stop her thoughtless tongue.
“Well, I’ll tell you something!” said Linton.
It lasted so long that it frightened even me.
“One time, however, we were near quarrelling.
However, the dogs gave notice of my approach.
Yet, who knows how long you’ll be a stranger?
“It is too hot for walking, let us rest here.
I did give him some lessons about snivelling.
“Give me that key: I will have it!” she said.
I can detain you both, quite concealed, here.
How the devil can you dream of fawning on me?
He died blissfully, Mr. Lockwood: he died so.
Lonely, like the devil, and envious like him?
Are there any rooms to lodge me in, I wonder?
How could you think of returning in this way?
And how are you transplanted here, Mrs. Dean?
“He’s, perhaps, dreaming now,” she continued.
The light flashed on his features as I spoke.
to you I’ve made myself worse than the devil.
“What is the matter, my little man?” I asked.
“They are going to the Grange, then?” I said.
Breakfast was over, and none had breakfasted.
ma boite!” exclaimed she, running towards it.
“You are dumb, Miss Eyre.”

I was dumb still.
“You never felt jealousy, did you, Miss Eyre?
I listened for some noise, but heard nothing.
How near had I approached him at that moment!
“What awful event has taken place?” said she.
I dressed, then, to be ready for emergencies.
“Now, my good fellow, how are you?” he asked.
“Oh, it was frightful!” he added, shuddering.
The return to Thornfield was yet to be tried.
I inquired soon if he had not been to London.
I told you we shall be married in four weeks.
I would much rather have all your confidence.
I had at heart a strange and anxious thought.
The event of last night again recurred to me.
The three gentlemen retreated simultaneously.
If the flood annoyed him, so much the better.
I must be provided for by a wealthy marriage.
I transformed myself into a will-o’-the-wisp.
Still I could not turn, nor retrace one step.
Why do I struggle to retain a valueless life?
On each side stood a sable bush—holly or yew.
The line is worth a hundred pages of fustian.
I was near, and listened to both you and her.
“I am an orphan, the daughter of a clergyman.
“Oh, that is nothing yet,” I muttered within.
At the same moment old Carlo barked joyfully.
Nothing speaks or stirs in me while you talk.
“Adopted fraternity will not do in this case.
I saw his fallibilities: I comprehended them.
“No, St. John, we are not friends as we were.
“Yes, I will, as your assistant,” I answered.
But I was forced to meet him again at supper.
All was changing utterly with a sudden sweep.
“Could you decide now?” asked the missionary.
“Was it known how it originated?” I demanded.
I endeavoured to recall him to the main fact.
Miss Adèle, a ward he had, was put to school.
I have little left in myself—I must have you.
“It is a bright, sunny morning, sir,” I said.
“I shall be glad to have a cup,” I answered.
“You scandalous old hypocrite!” she replied.
“Rough as a saw-edge, and hard as whinstone!
you won’t believe me, then?” said Catherine.
“I won’t be named a dog in the manger again.
She lay still now, her face bathed in tears.
A positive labour of Hercules, I assure you!
“Don’t put faith in a single word he speaks.
You’ll not meet any one on the front stairs.
“I’ve tied his tongue,” observed Heathcliff.
“I care for nothing in comparison with papa.
Catherine ran to the hearth to warm herself.
He’s a pretty little darling when he’s good.
I’d make such a pet of him, if he were mine.
The servants affirmed they had not seen her.
and why—?”

“Stop, my good friend!” I cried.
“When I wish to speak to you I’ll come here.
I needn’t disturb them; and I began to doze.
At length he summoned Hareton from his seat.
and don’t remind me of your existence again.
And yet I cannot continue in this condition!
I had read of such hideous incarnate demons.
I’m too happy; and yet I’m not happy enough.
But you are rather put upon, that’s certain.
Even for me life had its gleams of sunshine.
I walked about the chamber most of the time.
Go on: what fault do you find with me, pray?
The clock, far down in the hall, struck two.
Miss Ingram returned to us through the arch.
“Well,” said he, “what are you musing about?
Nature must be gladsome when I was so happy.
Are you well?”

“I believe I am.”

“Believe!
I want an explanation.”

“Then, sir, listen.
But I was mistaken; it was only candlelight.
“Jane!” called a voice, and I hastened down.
Nothing to cut a feeling or sting a passion?
“I am a fool!” cried Mr. Rochester suddenly.
But next day, Want came to me pale and bare.
I rose; I looked back at the bed I had left.
St. John passed the window reading a letter.
I felt—yes, idiot that I am—I felt degraded.
I will not pause either to accuse or repine.
“You are original,” said he, “and not timid.
At this moment he advanced from the parlour.
I believe I must say, Yes—and yet I shudder.
“When I go to India, Jane, will I leave you!
I breathed again: my blood resumed its flow.
Will she not depart as suddenly as she came?
I’ll have you all modelled in wax and clay!
With this insult my patience was at an end.
Catherine Linton?” I exclaimed, astonished.
We should have thought ourselves in heaven!
wisht, dry thy eyes—there’s a joy; kiss me.
Then what good is it discussing the matter?
Four weeks’ torture, tossing, and sickness!
She was nearly heartbroken when he ran off.
“Yet, for my sake, you must be friends now.
“By no means!” cried Mrs. Linton in answer.
Can’t you fancy the conclusions he’ll draw?
“Poor Hindley!” I exclaimed, involuntarily.
He jumped at the fruit; I raised it higher.
“You want setting down in your right place!
I did not recall that they had been at all.
Open the window again wide: fasten it open!
Did iver Christian body hear aught like it?
“It’s weel eneugh to ate a few porridge in.
Not there—not in heaven—not perished—where?
He was beyond my skill to quiet or console!
The evening of their expected arrival came.
Linton of Thrushcross Grange,” she replied.
“Oh, it will be something worse,” she said.
“We’ll respect Catherine’s filial scruples.
“‘How do you feel, Catherine?’ he repeated.
“Heathcliff dead!” I exclaimed, astonished.
it went quite through me!” exclaimed Abbot.
You are deceitful!”

How dare I, Mrs. Reed?
I was left there alone—winner of the field.
And why has she, or any other, curled hair?
“Too much noise, Grace,” said Mrs. Fairfax.
“I was absorbed, sir: yes, and I was happy.
“Carter, take him under the other shoulder.
I drew out my purse; a meagre thing it was.
“I am very ill, I know,” she said ere long.
The nurse now entered, and Bessie followed.
You are dreaming, sir,—or you are sneering.
The blast blew so strong I could not stand.
Our place was taken at the communion rails.
I must shut up my prize.”

We all withdrew.
you won’t kiss the husband of Bertha Mason?
What was their beauty to me in a few weeks?
I am bound to you with a strong attachment.
“As white as clay or death,” was responded.
My strength sufficed for but short answers.
I obtained a good situation, and was happy.
What will you do with your accomplishments?
She glanced over it, and handed it to Mary.
I advocate them: I am sworn to spread them.
Yes; at the distance of a thousand leagues!
“Yes,” said he, “there is my glory and joy.
I would much rather he had knocked me down.
My Master was long-suffering: so will I be.
Strange delight inspired me: on I hastened.
did he not leave England?”

“Leave England?
And the man seemed resolved to protract it.
“Great God!—what delusion has come over me?
My caress provoked a long, guttural gnarl.
Where he searched for them, I cannot tell.
“Take the candle, and go where you please.
“There you are, at your idle tricks again!
Heathcliff was hard to discover, at first.
“That brute of a lad has warmed me nicely.
By God, as if I would rear such a monster!
“At present, convey yourself and him away.
“I’m very unhappy!”

“A pity,” observed I.
“He’s a bird of bad omen: no mate for you.
How foolish to reveal those talons to him.
“The curate?”

“Damn the curate, and thee!
If you like Isabella, you shall marry her.
Cannot you tell him I will?” she returned.
I may say this; it commenced in a quarrel.
Oh, I’ve no doubt she’s in hell among you!
So much the worse for me that I am strong.
Come, give me a true history of the event.
Why should you be anxious to conceal them?
I know that ghosts have wandered on earth.
And—ah, see how it flows down my neck now!
Unluckily, my confidence proved misplaced.
“It’s some damnable writing,” he answered.
“You should have come, instead of writing.
You wouldn’t injure me, Linton, would you?
has the whelp been playing that game long?
Catherine always spoke of it as her house.
The four men came back unaccompanied also.
Time had little altered his person either.
“Stop!” he said, arresting her by the arm.
No, she turned up her nose at my civility.
I have not had a glimpse of one for weeks.
He had a “queer” end, as she expressed it.
“Is the fool drunk?” asked Mr. Heathcliff.
Nelly, take her; and leave me, all of you!
Last night I was on the threshold of hell.
I must reach it first, and then I’ll rest.
Mr. Heathcliff was there—laid on his back.
We were parted: I heard the words—

“Dear!
“But it was always in her,” was the reply.
I had heard no order given: I was puzzled.
“She treats me like a visitor,” thought I.
his character is unimpeachable, I suppose.
And was Mr. Rochester now ugly in my eyes?
If he does go, the change will be doleful.
No; what the deuce would you call her for?
You gifted with the power of pleasing him?
It was not, however, so saturnine a pride!
He made me love him without looking at me.
I knew it before I came here this evening.
Are you coming from Millcote, and on foot?
I would not—I could not—marry Miss Ingram.
I interpreted it as a warning of disaster.
“What!—How is this?” he exclaimed hastily.
I stood up and lifted my hand; it stopped.
I was brought face to face with Necessity.
“Perhaps a little water would restore her.
I wished to rise; but what could I put on?
My black silk frock hung against the wall.
Her whole face seemed to me full of charm.
“I am near nineteen: but I am not married.
“Where did you last reside?” he now asked.
It was the 5th of November, and a holiday.
If I were to marry you, you would kill me.
You think of Mr. Rochester?”

It was true.
Had life been wrecked as well as property?
Just at this moment the parlour-bell rang.
I resumed a livelier vein of conversation.
When I hear it, it carries me back a year.
Unluckily, it was a heap of dead rabbits.
I insist on perfect sobriety and silence.
“‘Maister Hindley!’ shouted our chaplain.
CHAPTER IV
What vain weathercocks we are!
“Oh, such a grand bairn!” she panted out.
“Why?” she asked, gazing nervously round.
Clear your face: you sha’n’t scowl at me!
You’ve played me an ill turn, Heathcliff!
“Among his books!” she cried, confounded.
He imagines me in a pet—in play, perhaps.
Are you speaking the truth about him now?
“Put him on his guard, and watch for him.
That’s not the way: upstairs, I tell you!
Will you be happy when I am in the earth?
Why did you betray your own heart, Cathy?
You left me too: but I won’t upbraid you!
Don’t stand muttering and mumbling there.
“I can’t sit on a chair,” sobbed the boy.
“Is he not a handsome lad?” he continued.
I held him till the fit exhausted itself.
I doubt whether he’ll see spring, indeed.
It is not poisoned, though I prepared it.
You’re pining for pure love, are you not?
and you must have got on an island, sure?
As she kissed me, her lips felt like ice.
“How they managed together, I can’t tell.
“‘Will you ask her to read to us, Zillah?
dare you pretend to rouse him against me?
Why did you hold the candle horizontally?
It drew him forth sooner than I expected.
“Where the dickens is she!” he continued.
I really saw in him a tyrant, a murderer.
How difficult it was to frame any answer!
“Enough!” he called out in a few minutes.
I said, “Who is there?” Nothing answered.
That woman was no other than Grace Poole.
She and Mr. Rochester sang a duet.”

“Mr.
Presently advanced into view Miss Ingram.
So far I have governed myself thoroughly.
I asked if Georgiana would accompany her.
One morning she told me I was at liberty.
“Oh, Jane, you torture me!” he exclaimed.
She obeyed him with what speed she might.
I will not be your English Céline Varens.
Mrs. Fairfax has said something, perhaps?
solitude!” he reiterated with irritation.
Where did you go?”

“What did I do, Jane?
What came of such an event?”

“Precisely!
All happiness will be torn away with you.
You will not be my comforter, my rescuer?
What a golden desert this spreading moor!
“May I speak to your mistresses?” I said.
I speak particularly of the young ladies.
My parents died before I could know them.
“Right,” said Mr. St. John, quite coolly.
Read.”

He threw the letter into her lap.
The next day I left Marsh End for Morton.
the readers of our era are less favoured.
Mr. Rivers rose now and put his cloak on.
It must now be shut up, I suppose?”

“No.
What sudden eagerness is this you evince?
I am the servant of an infallible Master.
He started to his feet and approached me.
Meantime, I heard St. John quit his room.
It was a journey of six-and-thirty hours.
I looked round in search of another road.
John withdrew without having observed me.
Famine for food, expectation for content.
We entered the wood, and wended homeward.
“Sit down,” said the young man, gruffly.
“A beautiful animal!” I commenced again.
“Not at your command!” retorted Hareton.
Heathcliff kicked his to the same place.
What had played Jabez’s part in the row?
I could have taken oath it had been six.
you are attempting the coxcomb, are you?
He swerved aside, and attempted to pass.
I cannot make it out.”

“It’s my secret.
Or must I have a fire lighted elsewhere?
What has there been to do at the Grange?
“I don’t care if you tell him,” said he.
“What do I want with yours?” I retorted.
You may look incredulous, if you please!
An unwelcomed infant it was, poor thing!
“Now I think of it, I’d better tell you.
“We’ll not begin with your little notes.
We’ve allas summut o’ either side in us.
“But I do,” said her cousin, shuddering.
“No,” said Catherine; “unless in dreams.
“And help your own naughty pet and mine.
Catherine stole out before break of day.
In the evening I went to the churchyard.
There was another sigh, close at my ear.
* * * * *

Thus ended Mrs. Dean’s story.
I’ll do both, as soon as I possibly can.
Let me go into the nursery!” was my cry.
I hope you like them?”

“No, sir.”

“No?
What stores of knowledge they possessed!
There was something I wanted to ask you.
I repeated the question more distinctly.
“How do you like Thornfield?” she asked.
What, in short, is his character?”

“Oh!
October, November, December passed away.
Rochester—he is just arrived.”

“Indeed!
The idea calmed me somewhat: I lay down.
I must pay a visit to the second storey.
you will go?”

“I am cold, sir.”

“Cold?
Why had he enjoined me, too, to secrecy?
I will endure only sense and resolution.
“Why did I never hear of this?” I asked.
“I shall get by very well,” I meditated.
“Little sceptic, you shall be convinced.
“Come and bid me good-morning,” said he.
I have surely not been dreaming, have I?
He, too, has always been called careful.
I half lost the sense of power over him.
“Who are you?” he asked of the intruder.
Wood and Briggs, look at the difference!
I turned my face away and put his aside.
“God bless you, my dear master!” I said.
“Is it you, Mr. St. John?” cried Hannah.
This morning, the village school opened.
No!”

“But you need not be a missionary.
It is dearer than the blood in my veins.
“Oh, I am glad!—I am glad!” I exclaimed.
No: such a martyrdom would be monstrous.
“Once more, why this refusal?” he asked.
I am sure there is something the matter.
“That is just what we hoped and thought!
And you will marry him, Jane, won’t you?
“Will you have a little more water, sir?
I forget that you have formed a new tie.
He has no indulgence for me—no fondness.
The First of the Seventy-First is come.
Come in; I’ll furnish them a reception.
Come, come, be merry and like yourself!
She was vexed, but she did not proceed.
You were really sorry for me, were you?
But she uttered falsehoods, didn’t she?
Nay, it’s not Nelly; don’t look at her!
How will you take it, ungrateful brute?
Call me two men out of the hall, Ellen.
But I begin to fancy you don’t like me.
I’d fling in bowl un’ all, if I wer ye!
“Then I can go, too, when I am a woman.
“Nice words to be used to a young lady!
After all, she was a sweet little girl.
My master inquired what was the matter.
“Good-evening, Joseph,” I said, coldly.
“Will you shut the door, if you please?
“‘I cannot tell them yet,’ he answered.
Linton can play the little tyrant well.
there is a talk about you at Gimmerton.
I asked if Mr. Heathcliff were at home?
Heathcliff gazed after him, and sighed.
What a blank, dreary mind he must have!
“What do you say?” demanded the master.
“Will you have some breakfast?” I said.
To-day, I am within sight of my heaven.
The box was corded, the card nailed on.
“Yes, sir.”

“Whose house is it?”

“Mr.
“You want a brooch,” said Mrs. Fairfax.
for the planet above quells their rays.
“What about, sir?”

“Whatever you like.
I wish I had stood firm—God knows I do!
“Qu’avez-vous, mademoiselle?” said she.
you revert to Mr. Rochester as a model!
“What did she say, sister?” asked Mary.
“I cannot find him in his bed.”

“Here!
I am sure I shall not be able to sleep.
I only smiled at her, and ran upstairs.
Mr. Rochester turned and glared at him.
I then sat down: I felt weak and tired.
I said I could not bear such words now.
“Jane, I never meant to wound you thus.
But I was not afraid: not in the least.
“Some does one thing, and some another.
I blamed none of those who repulsed me.
Shall I be an outcast again this night?
Let me see them—”

“Indeed, I will not.
Where are your friends?”

I was silent.
“You are quite a stranger at Vale Hall.
She had taken an amiable caprice to me.
I, for instance, am but dust and ashes.
I ran out into the garden: it was void.
He does not love me: I do not love him.
“You speak of friends, Jane?” he asked.
This is certainly a beautiful country!
“Where is she—my amiable lady?”

“Mrs.
“How—how dare you, under my roof?—God!
‘Run, Heathcliff, run!’ she whispered.
She entered and approached the hearth.
The adjective our gave mortal offence.
“I have nothing to forgive her, Ellen.
I fear it was wrong, though expedient.
“If I’ve done wrong, I’m dying for it.
How dare you show your giddiness here?
“Whose then—your master’s?” she asked.
“Damned—thou saucy witch!” he replied.
Mustn’t he be made to do as I ask him?
“Yes, indeed,” responded her reprover.
“Very well, if we can keep him, Ellen.
Thou art thy mother’s child, entirely!
“No—don’t kiss me: it takes my breath.
“Must not be continued, then,” I said.
“Oh, Catherine!” I cried, sorrowfully.
He was not pretty then, Ellen: oh, no!
“Only, let me alone, or I shall faint.
He poured it out, and handed me a cup.
“That was a great advance for the lad.
I should like to be climbing up there!
“Eea, aw keep th’ hause,” she replied.
“Is he a ghoul or a vampire?” I mused.
Did you hear her, Eliza and Georgiana?
“Miss Eyre, are you ill?” said Bessie.
“Then she ought to look more cheerful.
And is it that makes you so miserable?
you’ve got quite a new way of talking.
Classes were broken up, rules relaxed.
I am only the housekeeper—the manager.
I did not like re-entering Thornfield.
Do you wonder that I avow this to you?
I am going to leave you a few minutes.
A tread creaked on the stairs at last.
“She looks such a rough one,” said he.
My own?”

“No; some unaccountable one.
Where did you leave your furred cloak?
They were very cold, indeed, at first.
She had an alarm to call her up early.
I see trees laden with ripening fruit.
The clock was on the stroke of twelve.
I had rather be a thing than an angel.
What did he mean by such a pagan idea?
I laughed in my sleeve at his menaces.
Not, perhaps, once in a hundred years.
You mean you must become a part of me.
I expected no peace—no pleasure there.
I wished I could live in it and on it.
Human life and human labour were near.
I entered the shop: a woman was there.
She pointed to a seat; I sank into it.
“You still look very pale—and so thin!
I saw the fascination of the locality.
Standing still, he again looked at me.
Good evening!”

She held out her hand.
I looked up at him: he shunned my eye.
Glorious discovery to a lonely wretch!
I took a seat: St. John stood near me.
A missionary’s wife you must—shall be.
That, too, is very clear to my vision.
“Good-night, Jane,” he replied calmly.
“Now you will indeed hate me,” I said.
How?” My blood was again running cold.
I came only this evening,” I answered.
“Oh, you are indeed there, my skylark!
In spirit, I believe we must have met.
“What the devil, indeed!” I muttered.
you shall go to the gallows for this.
Where did she pick up this companion?
I’ll go to bed,” I interrupted again.
I was out of patience with her folly!
tell me what I’ve said to grieve him?
“I did not question him,” I answered.
Honest people don’t hide their deeds.
“This is insufferable!” he exclaimed.
I thought I was at home,” she sighed.
Don’t say anything; but stay with me.
Can I trust your assertion, Isabella?
You talk of her mind being unsettled.
‘Come in and get shot, if you please.
“‘I cannot commit murder,’ I replied.
“‘Oh, I forgot you,’ said the tyrant.
Pray don’t begin to dispute with him.
I am happy—and papa, dear, dear papa!
It’s a pity she could not be content.
Besides, he says I have seen his son.
you’ve not done right, have you, now?
no, indeed!” replied I with decision.
“My papa scorns yours!” cried Linton.
She tried to put it more comfortably.
The employment pleased both mightily.
He’s getten t’ raight sperrit in him!
“‘Thear, that’s t’ father!’ he cried.
The cups and saucers were laid ready.
Come, come—have done, and get to bed.
The harvest moon shone clear outside.
if I may take the liberty to inquire.
“Come, then,” he whispered earnestly.
“No, Nelly, I have not,” he answered.
Idle tales, you’ll say, and so say I.
Have you any pain?”

“No, sir.”

“Oh!
“But are your relatives so very poor?
“You naughty little thing!” she said.
it was the sole consolation they had.
And where, meantime, was Helen Burns?
But destiny, in the shape of the Rev.
How I wished sleep would silence her.
Can I not get so much of my own will?
“Did you expect a present, Miss Eyre?
And now what did you learn at Lowood?
These pictures were in water-colours.
Beauty of little consequence, indeed!
you are my paid subordinate, are you?
“Shall I call Mrs. Fairfax?” I asked.
She is a singular person.”

“Just so.
Well, I shall reflect on the subject.
I was not aware he could sing.”

“Oh!
I need not sell my soul to buy bliss.
I had never thought of Mr. Rochester.
“All’s right!—all’s right!” he cried.
there’s Dent and Lynn in the stables!
What do I want with half your estate?
I quailed momentarily—then I rallied.
I warn you of incredulity beforehand.
But I owe you no further explanation.
He referred him to me for assistance.
“I see I must come to an explanation.
I then framed and fixed a resolution.
I had injured—wounded—left my master.
Hannah was evidently fond of talking.
You hear now how I contradict myself.
Mary bent her head low over her work.
We can yet live,” said Diana at last.
My father and he quarrelled long ago.
Several knit, and a few sew a little.
She turned, but in a moment returned.
The eventful Thursday at length came.
Will He accept a mutilated sacrifice?
I will give my heart to God,” I said.
how far more potent is it than force!
To prolong doubt was to prolong hope.
What story belonged to this disaster?
“He is stone-blind,” he said at last.
How often am I to say the same thing?
She was much too fond of Heathcliff.
Did you notice his language, Linton?
You’re fit for a prince in disguise.
“She’d be sadly grieved to hear you.
“Sit down, sir,” he said, at length.
The meal hardly endured ten minutes.
I determined to watch his movements.
Why have you disregarded my request?
What possessed him to turn listener?
So you do seek elf-bolts to hurt us!
‘If iver I seed a seeght loike this!
“‘Not as ill as I wish,’ he replied.
“Mamma never told me I had a father.
it’s killing, a breath of night air!
Hareton, get forwards with the lass.
“My design is as honest as possible.
But I think he’s safe from her love.
“My cousin fancies you are an idiot.
“Oh, fie, silly child!” I exclaimed.
I’ll own that he’s with a harsh set.
I got a book, and pretended to read.
We knew Linton’s tones, and entered.
“For to-day we must part,” she said.
But leave me, and I shall be killed!
No,” she said, looking slowly round.
you mustn’t go and leave, after all.
By chance, you’ve managed tolerably.
“There’s law in the land, thank God!
Both parties were delayed very late.
Nothing stirred—the house was quiet.
“Well, I’m Mr. Lockwood, the master.
“That for the third time, you dunce!
All’s shut up at Thrushcross Grange.
shoo cannot stale t’ sowl o’ nob’dy!
You never had any,” said Heathcliff.
“Drag her away!” he cried, savagely.
I wondered greatly how it would end.
My thanks are due in three quarters.
“Bessie, what is the matter with me?
Can’t she manage to walk at her age?
Children younger than you die daily.
Such is the imperfect nature of man!
How do people do to get a new place?
“Well, that is beautiful, Miss Jane!
I bethought myself to ring the bell.
As to the thoughts, they are elfish.
She appeared to know it by instinct.
I rose and sat up in bed, listening.
You of importance to him in any way?
Genius is said to be self-conscious.
“No—stop!” interrupted Colonel Dent.
Kneel, and lift up your head.”

“Ah!
Something of masquerade I suspected.
“I don’t want change; you know that.
What did they do with her at Lowood?
he is flown.”

The moth roamed away.
I know my Maker sanctions what I do.
I don’t like to hear them spoken of.
Cudgel your brains for an expedient.
I shall just go on with it as usual.
and how strangely your eyes glitter!
“Let me be torn away, then” I cried.
But I err: you have not wept at all!
He would have me sought for: vainly.
with agony I thought of what I left.
Mind you don’t do wrong, that’s all.
You are a spinster?”

Diana laughed.
Once more he looked at the portrait.
“Must we part in this way, St. John?
“I should kill you—I am killing you?
I knew the steely ire I had whetted.
It was my time to assume ascendency.
My powers were in play and in force.
“Is that what he rang for?” I asked.
“It is a mere stump—a ghastly sight!
here I reach the root of the matter.
God bless you and reward you!”

“Mr.
Wisht, wisht; you mun’n’t go on so.
Have you been to Wuthering Heights?
“Come—are you coming?” I continued.
“The finest lad that ever breathed!
“No, I’ll not promise,” I repeated.
the gipsy—the ploughboy?” he cried.
Nay, you’ll not drive me off again.
“You are surely losing your reason.
“You are a hypocrite, too, are you?
They had already entered the court.
Don’t you see I can scarcely stand?
“Why, what is the matter?” cried I.
“Couldn’t ye ha’ said soa, at onst?
I shouldn’t care what you suffered.
I care nothing for your sufferings.
I forgive what you have done to me.
I shall be under those larch-trees.
“How long they are!” she exclaimed.
If he has, I must have been a baby.
Be a good lad; and I’ll do for you.
He was in earnest: in love, really.
There are only a few red ashes now.
“Oh!” he sobbed, “I cannot bear it!
Miss Linton, take your seat by him.
He grew sullen, and began to swear.
“Whet, whoiver knew yah wur coming?
“He is afraid I shall laugh at him.
He swore at her and seized another.
Catherine wisely put in her tongue.
“Now, you go!” he said to Earnshaw.
Do take some food, and some repose.
Self-righteousness is not religion.
It emboldened me to ask a question.
What a strange light inspired them!
“Can I do anything?” I asked again.
Oh yes, I had forgotten the salary!
My eye was quickly at the aperture.
“What alienates him from the house?
I bethought myself of an expedient.
She looked up with a sort of start.
No snivel!—no sentiment!—no regret!
With whom will Blanche Ingram pair?
“Do you feel ill, sir?” I inquired.
Don’t be so overcome, man: bear up!
She proposed a walk in the grounds.
I met Adèle leaving the schoolroom.
Do you really wish the bairn to go?
We were now approaching Thornfield.
What a hot and strong grasp he had!
CHAPTER XXVIII
Two days are passed.
“She does look white,” said Hannah.
He stamped the snow from his boots.
“My uncle John was your uncle John?
Famous equality and fraternisation!
How hurried was their first glance!
“They guessed, ma’am: they guessed.
“Give me the water, Mary,” he said.
“A good idea!” I thought with glee.
Pilot lay beside us: all was quiet.
I caressed, in order to soothe him.
“The dogs do right to be vigilant.
“I wish my father were back again.
Then a new idea flashed across me.
I’ll run down and secure my guest.
“But I’ll not believe this idiocy!
for shame!” she repeated, angrily.
“I’ll not listen to your slanders.
“What does he teach you?” I asked.
“There’s nobody here!” I insisted.
Mr. Earnshaw vouchsafed no answer.
“She degenerates into a mere slut!
“Not for one minute,” she replied.
I wished, yet feared, to find him.
But I tell you he wouldn’t let me!
“Heathcliff—I shudder to name him!
“So make haste, Ellen!” she cried.
to try to hinder me from entering.
And behave like a gentleman, mind!
“He has satisfied my expectations.
Hasn’t he Hareton for a companion?
I’d far rather have talked to you.
I’ve done as you wished, I’m sure.
I don’t like you standing over me.
you’ll see nothing to provoke you.
And how long were you in the hole?
The single servant returned first.
Heathcliff advanced to the hearth.
I wish he’d been soldered in lead.
“She’s mistaken, I said to myself.
That is an improvement, I thought.
But now, I’m glad you did not try.
for shame!” cried the lady’s-maid.
yes: no jail was ever more secure.
“Let her go,” was the only answer.
What sorrowful eyes you fix on me!
How coolly my little lady says it!
Jeannette,” with a kiss I set out.
“Stubborn?” he said, “and annoyed.
She is, as you say, singular—very.
“And a little depressed,” he said.
Now go, and send Sophie for Adèle.
“Well, Blanche?” said Lord Ingram.
The cry died, and was not renewed.
and why had the Fury flown at him?
Then Georgiana produced her album.
It will expiate at God’s tribunal.
Why do you importune me about her!
You disapprove of me still, I see.
I have a word to say to the woman.
John, who is it?” I heard one ask.
“What, you have got up!” she said.
They loved their sequestered home.
“Our uncle John is dead,” said he.
Think like me, Jane—trust like me.
Could I but see him!—but a moment!
“Can there be life here?” I asked.
“What is the matter?” he inquired.
I have now been married ten years.
The other did not look seventeen.
“I only wish I knew the best way!
“That’s right!” I said to myself.
Well, go, if you please—get away!
“The night through,” he repeated.
Nay, there’s no comprehending it.
“Never mind!” I answered, tartly.
of the same week?” she exclaimed.
Let me go, and I’ll make her rue!
a monster, and not a human being!
He departed, and I went upstairs.
You never harmed me in your life.
I’m tired of being enclosed here.
“She does not know what she says.
Come, I’m not going to nurse him.
Have you hurt yourself?” he said.
“I can’t tell why we should stay.
“Wash away your spleen,” he said.
or he thinks us fools, every one.
Careful and kind—that’s paternal.
I’m not angry that you struck me.
“I’d rather be hugged by a snake.
“I delivered Catherine’s message.
And, if you do, what is it about?
He did not strike it off, either.
“Say you forgive me, Hareton, do.
“What did he say?” asked Hareton.
“Why, almost bright and cheerful.
That smile, and ghastly paleness!
“There, that is pure awkwardness!
Dawn restored me to common sense.
At dusk he went into his chamber.
A singular notion dawned upon me.
I shall be killed if—”

“Silence!
I was asleep, and Helen was—dead.
And who taught you to paint wind?
my supposition cannot be correct.
Tell me.”

“Nothing—nothing, sir.
Eliza surveyed her parent calmly.
How full the hedges are of roses!
“It is a long way,” I again said.
What love have I for Miss Ingram?
And what ailed the chestnut tree?
“Did I like his voice?” he asked.
“Am I cruel in my love?” he said.
So I gave way and cried heartily.
Then he would draw me to him: no.
All this I did without one sound.
“Would she take my gloves?”

“No!
“Will you give me that?” I asked.
“I feel I cannot go much farther.
Were the inmates retired to rest?
Move off, I say!”

“Hush, Hannah!
Diana offered to teach me German.
I am sitting alone on the hearth.
What a love—what a miracle I was!
Now, I did not like this, reader.
The case is very plain before me.
The dim room was full of visions.
What do you see?” asked St. John.
I looked very pale, she observed.
“She is all here: her heart, too.
A rich woman?”

“Quite rich, sir.
The snow began to drive thickly.
I could not bear the employment.
Where will their insolence stop?
It was only that you looked odd.
I want to know what I should do.
“Yes, now and then,” I answered.
don’t, Miss Catherine!” I cried.
not fear of the thunder, surely?
He unfastened it, and leant out.
“I compliment you on your taste.
“No!” she replied, peremptorily.
Did he shoot my lapwings, Nelly?
Joseph sits up late, doesn’t he?
I’ll read it: for I keep it yet.
Let me alone,” sobbed Catherine.
Are you as soft as your brother?
“‘I beg your pardon,’ I replied.
“It will be dark in ten minutes.
Now, don’t wince, and colour up!
“What should ail them?” he said.
Well, something very flattering.
almost as proud as I am of mine.
May I not, Ellen?”

“No, indeed!
“Linton was white and trembling.
“To the devil with your clamour!
I’m not going to tell you again.
Let me hear how it came to pass.
Conventionality is not morality.
Come, we’ll go down.” They went.
Why do you tremble so violently?
to get more knocks?”

“Nonsense!
“What is it about?” I continued.
Such was my first day at Lowood.
“Is there only one?” I demanded.
I told her I liked it very much.
“Grace!” exclaimed Mrs. Fairfax.
a novice not worship her priest!
Grace Poole—you have guessed it.
Again the arch yawns; they come.
Is there not one face you study?
I must keep to my post, however.
Then my own thoughts worried me.
Georgiana also advanced to look.
I know another way to the house.
Sophie, I supposed, had come in.
It was half dream, half reality.
I lay faint, longing to be dead.
I could not soon recover myself.
“You come out at last,” he said.
Nothing bitter—nothing poignant?
Disappointment made me reckless.
What made you think of ambition?
“Poor Carlo loves me,” said she.
It was truly hard work at first.
Powerful angels, safe in heaven!
I dared not answer the question.
And with that answer he left me.
CHAPTER XXXVI
The daylight came.
Where was his daring stride now?
Lockwood, your new tenant, sir.
“T’ maister’s down i’ t’ fowld.
“Were you asked?” she repeated.
Shouldn’t they have been happy?
Give Skulker some water, Jenny.
She never was in a consumption.
I’ll engage he’s lurking there.
Do you know what o’clock it is?
This is quite an easy interval.
you don’t deserve this welcome.
I expect you to feel flattered.
“God keep him meek and patient!
He told me to fetch some water.
She had no breath for speaking.
Come here and kneel down again!
I have not one word of comfort.
“Service is over,” I announced.
“For heaven’s sake, hurry down!
She says you are a—What was it?
you go with her round the farm.
Did anybody ever hear the like!
“It’s wrong to anticipate evil.
“And she loved mine,” added he.
“However, we’ll be friends now.
Hadn’t you better lie down now?
“‘I wer sure he’d sarve ye out!
Now, Ellen, you have heard all.
What has she been doing to you?
Did master save you, Mrs. Dean?
You are miserable, are you not?
I didn’t like to hear him talk!
The delusion did not last long.
what should I have done, Ellen?
Why have I alluded to this man?
The breakfast-room door opened.
“Wicked and cruel boy!” I said.
why, that is like a baby again!
What, you are a baby after all!
and what large prominent teeth!
Who introduced this innovation?
How the new feeling bore me up!
“Are there any letters for J.E.
Bless you, child; what an idea!
I’ll explain all this some day.
Who is in the room besides you?
“Oh, I wish I might go to them!
I compared him with his guests.
That feature too is propitious.
He took the glass from my hand.
Neither of us had dropt a tear.
“I could never have thought it.
I hied me to the window-recess.
Oh, how blind had been my eyes!
He sought me a partner betimes.
Jane—give it me now.”

A pause.
Who in the world cares for you?
Dim dawn glimmered in the yard.
What a still, hot, perfect day!
“To be sure,” added her sister.
“You are very hungry,” he said.
Indoors we agreed equally well.
“A missionary I resolved to be.
“I am so giddy and thoughtless!
You start—did you hear a noise?
Yes; slaving amongst strangers!
“Good-night, St. John,” said I.
St. John, I will not marry you.
We should never suit.”

“Plain!
I cannot tell—I am not certain.
You are not gone: not vanished?
“What are ye for?” he shouted.
“How can I!” I said at length.
There, John, fasten the chain.
In the evening we had a dance.
He drew back in consternation.
“Oh, dear!” she cried at last.
Of course I do,” she answered.
They’ll meet the fate of Milo!
and he called on Mr. Earnshaw!
Will you do so, my good Nelly?
“Am I nothing to you any more?
And you could do it so easily.
I opened it—it was very short.
“Now he is here,” I exclaimed.
I shall die!”

“Damn the fool!
I’d give a great deal to know.
“Why, she’s a liar to the end!
I cannot live without my life!
Now, let us have no petulance.
Where is the pony, Miss Cathy?
He’s bitten—and so is Charlie.
You have not told papa, Ellen?
Now here is the babyish trash.
not let me come to the Grange?
Ellen, he’ll think we’re lost.
He sucked on like an innocent.
I touched his hand, and spoke.
You should be bolder.”

“What!
It is all I ever desire to be.
“Yes; this is the dining-room.
“Did you hear that loud laugh?
you must be tenacious of life.
Do you never laugh, Miss Eyre?
A post-chaise was approaching.
“She won’t come now,” said he.
“Is this Jane Eyre?” she said.
She was by that time laid out.
What so blind as inexperience?
never had I loved him so well.
To Ireland?”

“Yes—to Ireland.
It is time for lessons.”

“Mr.
“It is near midnight,” I said.
My head swam as I stood erect.
Childish and slender creature!
I was driven to the point now.
For some minutes no one spoke.
“What is the matter?” I asked.
“Has anything happened?”

“No.
Hannah soon had a lantern lit.
A very long silence succeeded.
he’s dreaming nothing dreary.
“Who is to separate us, pray?
Come and take your seat here.
Well, he’ll wait a while yet.
But she’s a real little fool.
Trouble me no more about her.
you should not be sullen now.
I love my murderer—but yours!
Oh, confound the vapid thing!
Yes; you have cause to blush.
I asked if the master was in?
“She did, she did, Catherine!
We were recalled by a scream.
“No,” was the muttered reply.
“Is not your father very ill?
“Consent to what?” she asked.
Edgar is not dead?” I gasped.
And you join him against her.
She cries so I can’t bear it.
and what does not recall her?
Rat!” and bellowed out aloud.
Your young master.”

“Master!
I wished it had been doubled.
“How are you to-night, Helen?
“Why are you come here, Jane?
Miss Eyre, I beg your pardon.
“Is there a flood?” he cried.
I was left in total darkness.
He is rich, is he not?”

“Oh!
“Here then is a Corsair-song.
explain!” commanded the lady.
A comparative silence ensued.
here!” was shouted in return.
He looked at me some minutes.
“At your peril you advertise!
Not long; of that I was sure.
Here one could wander unseen.
I must leave him, it appears.
You are to share my solitude.
But let me come to the point.
Then came a deep, strong sob.
I was hateful in my own eyes.
I was spared the humiliation.
“You have never been married?
She went one way; he another.
Did I know French and German?
Rosamond a missionary’s wife?
“She is lovely,” he murmured.
He looked rather embarrassed.
You know that.”

“Are we not?
“Where are you?” I exclaimed.
Are you an independent woman?
“No—no—Jane; you must not go.
That is probably rather soft?
I shall go, notwithstanding.
“Rough weather!” I remarked.
Fellow-martyrs, have at him!
Oh, my dear Mary, look here!
Put him in the cellar, papa.
She sat on the sofa quietly.
You must come home directly.
That’s enough; let me alone.
I resolved to encourage him.
Well then, it is my darling!
you needn’t be so disturbed.
I on the brink of the grave!
Ellen Dean, go and seek her.
“You’ve seen me before, sir.
Whear the hell wold ye gang?
I shall not pity you, not I.
You could be free instantly.
Your pride cannot blind God!
He’s a human being,” I said.
I said we should draw water.
You’ve brought it, have you?
“How often am I to call you?
“No, that won’t do,” I said.
kind, sweet, good Catherine!
He’ll be distressed already.
What shall we do?”

“Not he!
“But he shall answer for it.
But I won’t complain to you!
‘How was I to blame?’

“‘Oh!
How the devil is he so like?
I never dreamt of his dying!
do you hear?” she continued.
I framed an excuse to go in.
He must either be up or out.
How small my portion seemed!
That must be matter of fact.
Fairfax, I suppose?” said I.
“Oh, I had forgotten Céline!
in that case I must abridge.
Will he leave it again soon?
Yes,—and standing in a pool!
“Has anything happened here?
Would she take it as a joke?
That is a hundred miles off!
“Read the letter,” she said.
I have not been trampled on.
Is this my pale, little elf?
“How late it grows!” I said.
Away with evil presentiment!
“Stop!” she cried in French.
Why did you shake your head?
“I resumed my notice of you.
Yet I drew near and knocked.
And good evening, old Carlo.
But what of the resemblance?
You are wasting away.”

“No.
“Then shake hands,” I added.
“Down, Pilot!” I again said.
I felt a little embarrassed.
Oh, you need not be jealous!
“No,” I said, half smiling.
and how—how funny and grim!
Unnatural cub, come hither!
“I’ll call him,” I replied.
“Who can it be?” I thought.
Will that please you, dear?
Tell the truth, Heathcliff!
Nelly, the room is haunted!
I wish I were out of doors!
“She keeps her own counsel!
But what could be done now?
“Forgiveness!” said Linton.
I entered without knocking.
“That man I’ve seen before.
Linton stood on the hearth.
“Who is that?” I whispered.
“He’s good and patient now.
Heathcliff, let me go home!
“Stay one minute,” I began.
Do you ever dream, Hareton?
“Hareton, Hareton, Hareton!
I’s gang up to my own rahm.
Fling her into the kitchen!
“Well, who am I?” he asked.
and what are you doing now?
I recalled her to my level.
“What did you say, my dear?
“Nor any traditions of one?
And where is Mr. Rochester?
“It is too fine,” said she.
help!” three times rapidly.
The gentlemen now appeared.
Reed.”

“Reed of Gateshead?
How do you know her?”

“Mr.
I told him I had no change.
I went through rich scenes!
“That is my wife,” said he.
sustain me a little longer!
But she is worn to nothing.
He was my mother’s brother.
“Had I done these pictures?
“Any ill news?” I demanded.
Who has his letters?”

“Mr.
“Stop one minute!” I cried.
Would I do him this favour?
I wonder what they thought.
Leah liked her well enough.
I would not accost him yet.
But it is useless grieving.
He and I went up to London.
I shall join you directly.
“Rich, sir!” she returned.
Is not that his character?
It formed a sweet picture.
“Nay, don’t!” I entreated.
“What a trifle scares you!
And yet, cruel Heathcliff!
“Is that Catherine Linton?
Are they red, any of them?
not through that kirkyard.
“Nelly is my hidden enemy.
We’ve odd reports up here.
And if not, is he a devil?
Where is the maid-servant?
Is Hareton to be a beggar?
ye marred, wearisome nowt!
Won’t you come here again?
That is not my Heathcliff.
“Did she die like a saint?
Ah, he was in such a fury!
“‘What is ther to do, now?
“And you may come with me.
“What is the matter, love?
“Ellen, are not you tired?
He made ye skift properly!
You’ll not tell, will you?
How are you at the Grange?
“But first—get up, Linton!
I don’t want you to speak.
Mrs. Dean!” she exclaimed.
“I depart again to-morrow.
Where were you last night?
Besides, Jane”—she paused.
Is not the thing feasible?
Confound these civilities!
I continually forget them.
“Why not?” I asked myself.
and who did it?” he asked.
“How do you do?” he asked.
“Will you play?” he asked.
I’ll pledge my word on it.
“Well, I must get it over.
I look round and I listen.
I have not been petrified.
Answer me truly once more.
“What would you do, Adèle?
I wished you were at home.
I was glad when it ceased.
Is Thornfield Hall a ruin?
The moon shone peacefully.
Mr. Wood seemed at a loss.
“Oh, Jane, this is bitter!
I coveted a cake of bread.
Oh, this spectre of death!
Meantime a month was gone.
“Are you well?” she asked.
“Well?” he answered icily.
I confessed it by silence.
“Alone, Jane?” they asked.
“And afterwards?” I urged.
“Where is he?” I demanded.
I know it to be otherwise.
Here, take a little wine.
sit ye down, ill childer!
“A good subject to start!
I nursed her, poor thing!
“No,” answered Catherine.
“Take warning and begone!
And hark you, Heathcliff!
Hindley, do take warning.
“It ’ud be to more sense.
“I wonder as much as you.
You shall stay: now then!
Gie me that,” he replied.
I detested him just then.
I wish it may prove true.
I’ve been haunted, Nelly!
If you do, I’ll keep you.
Gooid-for-naught madling!
Are you sure you hate me?
Why shouldn’t you suffer?
I shall be sorry for you.
You have killed yourself.
Damn the hellish villain!
“Is uncle?” he continued.
and sometimes bring papa.
“Silence!” I interrupted.
I wonder where Zillah is!
you are not afraid of me?
“I’ll not stay by myself.
I gave her a little wine.
Ellen, what do you think?
Why could I never please?
Oh, you mean Miss Varens!
Where did you see Latmos?
A very long time elapsed.
Blasphemy against nature!
Spare us the enumeration!
yes: the more’s the pity!
“She told us such things!
you think yourself sharp.
A most ingenious quibble!
I got up, but did not go.
What love has she for me?
Had an accident happened?
It gazed and gazed on me.
I am sick of the subject.
What can they do for you?
Now, Mr. Rivers, do come.
“Not, I hope, in thought?
What is there to explain?
He was soon out of sight.
It stopped as I beckoned.
I had dreaded he was mad.
I had heard of it before.
Delightful consciousness!
I longed for thee, Janet!
Then there was a hubbub!
That was their pleasure!
She did not yell out—no!
I was fairly mad at him.
Nelly, you are not glad!
There, you won’t answer.
He began to speak first.
Linton looked terrified.
where is that?” I asked.
“Shut the window, Ellen!
Nay, we’ve noa parlours.
“I thought he wished it.
Heathcliff, I shall die!
Oh, I’m aching all over!
He was away three weeks.
Come, Ellen, let us run!
But I guess it’s raight!
“Why?” she asked, aloud.
you have a short memory.
“Winter is not here yet.
making love in play, eh?
What can I do for Cathy?
The lock was re-secured.
“I wish he would arrive!
It was not the attorney.
it fair brusts my heart!
“Silence!” he exclaimed.
And now you’d better go!
“Did she say that to me?
Because it is the truth.
Mr. Brocklehurst hemmed.
“How do you do, my dear?
Rochester!” I exclaimed.
bearing a pot of porter.
I was chilled with fear.
I shall take the candle.
I was amazed—confounded.
The clock struck eleven.
But poor Madame Joubert!
You have analysed, then.
Annihilated in a moment.
Good angels be my guard!
None: and that you know.
Say yes, quickly.”

“Mr.
Is this my mustard-seed?
Are you satisfied, Jane?
What do you say to that?
God must have led me on.
Her coming disturbed me.
Diana then turned to me.
You missed your epithet.
He waited for an answer.
I will never undergo it.
Do you not see it, Jane?
I was a fool both times.
You are certain of that?
What are you sulky for?
Are you going upstairs?
What do you talk about?
“I accepted him, Nelly.
Look at little Hareton!
Nelly, I am Heathcliff!
And you are Heathcliff!
If so, give directions.
How has he been living?
Traitor!” I ejaculated.
I want to frighten him.
“Thear!” he ejaculated.
ech!” exclaimed Joseph.
“Weel done, Miss Cathy!
“You are not going yet.
Why did you despise me?
Edgar will not hurt us.
Isabella was not asked.
When will they be here?
“None of that nonsense!
“Is that little Linton?
“No, papa!” she gasped.
Now, then, there he is!
“I don’t know,” I said.
It drove her desperate.
“No more runnings away!
“‘Get away this moment!
I returned to my stool.
“What a dreadful noise!
out already?” said she.
I then turned eastward.
“Good-night again, sir.
“Here he is!” said she.
“Am I wanted?” I asked.
“And this is Jane Eyre?
Why do you smile, Jane?
what?” he said hastily.
How stern you look now!
Little nervous subject!
Do you know him?”

“Mr.
not a word of reproach?
How could she serve me?
I must apply somewhere.
I feared it must be so.
“And where do you live?
“Dead?” repeated Diana.
I asked him to come in.
“It is,” said St. John.
“Not a seasonable hour!
Must I relinquish that?
Rivers!” I interrupted.
But Hannah, poor woman!
St. John arrived first.
This silence damped me.
Sweet was that evening.
“I am coming!” I cried.
And if I did—what then?
No one is living there.
He would be alone, too.
“It is you—is it, Jane?
‘Maister, coom hither!
We came to the chapel.
“Begone, you vagabond!
I can’t eat my dinner.
Can you make that out?
What did I say, Nelly?
I remembered the eyes.
Well, there was cause.
What mun we have next?
weel done, Miss Cathy!
Hindley was not there.
From pity and charity!
Was it right or wrong?
That is how I’m loved!
Hush, hush, Catherine!
“Look there!” he said.
Oh, give me the poker!
“Listen to that child!
Oh, I owe him so much.
How am I to love papa?
He’s taller than I am!
Ah, papa, you started!
Pretty loving, indeed!
Oh, darling Catherine!
I demanded my release.
“Is she gone?” I said.
How dare you touch me?
I rode into the court.
Yah sud ha’ send word.
Ask him, Ellen.”

“Mr.
I returned to my work.
What’s your grievance?
Those deep black eyes!
Reed, my uncle’s wife.
“Where is that region?
“Was that Grace Poole?
your folly sickens me.
“I will, in few words.
The eye is favourable.
“I wish he would come!
I now ran to meet him.
I found him at supper.
You are looking grave.
What shall I do, Jane?
“Oh, comply!” it said.
I thought of this too.
About two o’clock P.M.
I entered the village.
I took sudden courage.
“You are better, then.
“It is not your place.
I had twenty scholars.
what is it?” I gasped.
“As I exclaimed ‘Jane!
And why weep for this?
A nod was the answer.
Oh, how weary I grow.
Do you think they do?
Oh, mamma, come here.
Speak the truth, now.
“Hareton, it’s Nelly!
“Ay—nay,” he drawled.
“That’s not the plan.
why—”

He was silent.
Return to your books.
Mincing un’ munching!
you know she has not!
“Oh, don’t, don’t go.
Tell me now, can you?
“I’ll tie the riband.
And where is Phoenix?
Ellen, show him down.
“Has he ever seen me?
Mr. Linton looked up.
It is Linton, I mean.
But where is the use?
“Come here,” he said.
the verse of a Psalm!
“Julia Severn, ma’am!
I was no Helen Burns.
I was not long there.
a charitable concern.
The sound was hushed.
“Not a whit!—courage!
Do you truly love me?
The rain rushed down.
“Where are you going?
I shall begin to-day.
“’Ware!” cried Grace.
I could not find her.
The clock struck ten.
Hannah, is that milk?
There was no disease.
I am sure I pity you.
I scorn the weakness.
“What have you heard?
“The late!” I gasped.
Heathcliff?” I said.
I cannot escort you.
“Begone!” I shouted.
come in!” he sobbed.
I’ll tell you, I do.
“What good do I get?
I do wish he’d come.
Thank Hivin for all!
how has he got rich?
But do you like her?
you sha’n’t be hurt!
Why am I so changed?
It is the last time!
If he had caught me!
Don’t be frightened.
for he meant nought.
Where have you been?
That does grieve me.
Come, and sit by me.
How must I quit her?
“Foolish, silly boy!
You’ll not go, then?
Get up!” he shouted.
Come, then, my hero.
Why, the man is mad!
What would he think?
No, don’t turn away!
“Think for yourself!
‘I can’t endure you!
“Yet I’ll answer it.
December 21st, 1847.
How is he my master?
I was now in for it.
What was the matter?
Had I forgotten her?
Here it comes again!
You have a shawl on.
“What did you think?
Did I wake or sleep?
Had I been dreaming?
Jane,” he continued.
Carter—hurry!—hurry!
Mrs. Poole advanced.
How weak my conduct!
How did you proceed?
This—this is wicked.
I could not help it.
Everywhere sunshine.
I must do something.
Oh, for but a crust!
Let me condense now.
This was the climax.
But I declare it is.
How and where is he?
No ruth met my ruth.
Oh, that gentleness!
Jane!”—nothing more.
How I ran sometimes!
Under what auspices?
A dreadful calamity!
And what did she do?
“Damn him!”—(To me.)
“Why did he wish it?
What do I sacrifice?
I asked the reason.
But, away with you!
my heart’s darling!
Catherine was mute.
Damn thee, kiss me!
He has not, has he?
Don’t interrupt me.
You do not know me?
“Oh, Edgar darling!
“We are vanquished!
Yes, here are more!
“Who is coward now?
“Hush, this moment!
“The Lord bless us!
The Lord forgie us!
He’s a lying fiend!
Don’t persist, sir!
How strong you are!
Will you forget me?
“No!” she shrieked.
‘You shall do that.
I’ve just seen him.
“There, Miss Cathy!
Where does he live?
“I can’t fancy him.
I’ll not stay here!
Don’t you?”

“I do.
How she does stare!
I won’t drink that.
you must look once.
Where would you go?
But, step in, pray!
“Strange happiness!
“And what a scream!
I slowly descended.
I was glad of this.
For that is Latmos.
She then was there.
“When will he come?
What is to be done?
“Who calls me aunt?
and like you again!
Do you believe him?
But listen—whisper.
What is the matter?
“One instant, Jane.
Hannah, fetch some.
He just touched it.
I do not feel them.
How should we feel?
Is it only a voice?
God bless you, sir!
And what did I do?
That was not long.
Hush, child, hush!
Come, come to bed!
“What kept her up?
I dared not enter.
“Are they at home?
“What will she do?
we are vanquished!
But go—make haste!
“I shall not stay.
“No,” he answered.
Do I want to live?
“Hush, my darling!
it is unutterable!
I refused to tell.
“Hindley Earnshaw!
What’s the matter?
that means naught.
Let us make haste.
I’ll not hurt you.
Won’t I tell mama?
what a great nose!
“And what is hell?
that pricks pride.
“Speak,” he urged.
I cannot say more.
Did I dream still?
I was soon asleep.
No—a mere scratch.
“I am sure you do.
What cold fingers!
And how is Bessie?
Is the nurse here?
What does it mean?
Don’t laugh at me.
The service began.
What then is left?
Believe in heaven.
I thought of this.
All was obscurity.
Hannah was baking.
He shook his head.
Who is fit for it?
it would never do!
I was heart-wrung.
He obeyed at once.
How fast I walked!
“No, ma’am—oh, no!
John dresses well.
“My seared vision!
A capital fellow!
Oh, do—once more!
“Catherine, love!
Kiss me, Hareton!
What is he about?
Half-past twelve.
Is it really you?
Look, Heathcliff!
Find a way, then!
It was heartless!
If so, is he mad?
Dree, and dreary!
Well, never mind.
Heathcliff, dear!
You deserve this.
Don’t be alarmed!
Oh, damn my soul!
Let us go, Ellen.
“Away after them!
say you have not?
“You little liar!
He’s a grand lad!
snivelling again?
“Or marry me now.
I don’t love you!
I don’t hate you.
It is our secret.
He’s got over it.
You sit down too.
she’s relentless.
April 13th, 1848.
and what a mouth!
what do you mean?
“A new servitude!
“What can you do?
it is consistent.
Now I saw no bad.
I went up to her.
Will you be mine?
The lamp was lit.
You soon give in.
“Is she original?
Off with you now.
What was I to do?
Who is ambitious?
Poetry destroyed?
What is he doing?
Were we not four?
Not for a moment.
He spoke at last.
“Thank you, Jane.
But how they fix!
to him invisible.
My heart swelled.
Now, I thank God!
“Thank you, John.
Poor Heathcliff!
“Cathy, do come.
“See here, wife!
But who is this?
“And it stirred.
It’s true, then!
Oh, I’m burning!
“It is needless.
I shook my head.
Don’t tell papa.
Do say you will.
Let go my frock!
“I am by myself.
“Stay all night?
The whole night!
hold your noise!
“Damnable witch!
“Accursed witch!
No!” he replied.
There were none.
what!” he cried.
“What do I want?
I cannot say it.
Promptly spoken.
Well, to resume.
What can she do?
I shook my head.
Would she laugh?
How do you feel?
I saw her do it.
Vain aspiration!
“Yes, Aunt Reed.
I then left her.
I stopped at it.
I rose ere long.
I was comforted.
“I hope I shall.
Genius banished?
St. John smiled.
Oh, I know well!
Hush, Isabella!
I’ve forgotten.
Mrs. Dean came.
There’s a mess!
I have no pity!
But never mind!
I’m sorry, too.
“There—damn it!
‘That’s father!
It began oddly.
“Mistress Dean?
Down with them!
wake!” I cried.
I kept my word.
oh, my dearest!
Nonsense, Jane!
“Of course not.
“There you are!
“Hem!” said he.
I looked at it.
Is she piquant?
Mrs. Rochester!
Let me hear it.
Who wants them?
Where did I go?
Oh, Providence!
I was silenced.
You, penniless!
I rose at dawn.
“Hey, Gnasher!
you come back?
Heathcliff—Mr.
“Don’t vex me.
“Persuade him!
Oh, damnation!
I forgive you.
Down with you.
Oh, for shame!
what a beauty!
“Wicked Ellen!
And you won’t.
“Pray ride on!
“The wretches!
Pretty Linton!
Dean, go away.
There, to bed!
It isn’t hers!
Disturbed her?
I had not one.
where are you?
But Servitude!
“Miss Fairfax?
Who blames me?
How dared you?
how do you do?
is there more?
what to Mason?
Abhorred spot!
Who were they?
Hannah opened.
It is evening.
My great work?
I am well now.
But what then?
That is wrong.
Here he comes!
God bless him!
How he starts!
Bless you, no!
was that you?
where is she?
You prove it.
“Oh, heavens!
“By hell, no!
“I demand it!
“And I dying!
You are slow!
Thear, agean!
It is enough!
Damn you all!
Where is she?
But cheer up!
“Despise you?
I’d join him.
How should I?
It racked me!
Off with her!
Why should I?
“Take me out!
Are you hurt?
oh, shocking!
why should I?
And, O ma’am!
What a smile!
Mrs. Fairfax!
Leah entered.
We descended.
“Oh, my best!
“That’s well!
“How are you?
I considered.
I took leave.
I reached it.
Do excuse me.
Then I awoke.
Tell me that.
“Wait for me!
I took it up.
If so, whose?
In what land?
“Who is this?
Is this true?
He helped me.
A vain idea!
Shame on ye!
“Who was it?
Is she here?
But altered!
Do you hear?
How strange!
“None o’ me!
Oh, my life!
(He it was.)
Let us hear.
Do you hear?
Oh, damn it!
CURRER BELL.
Vain favour!
“Surely not!
“Well, well!
Poor things!
How is this?
Can you see?
“Thornfield?
“What is it?
Blind puppy!
“What about?
Not exactly.
you thought!
“Impossible!
What of him?
“Oh, I know!
Where to go?
I groped on.
Ah, childer!
Why—nothing.
But courage!
my vocation?
Close union!
I consented.
“Is it Jane?
“What, Jane!
Heathcliff?
The idiots!
Do you see?
Good-night!
“For shame!
Bang, bang.
“Oh, Nelly!
“Oh, Cathy!
“Oh, Ellen!
“Oh, Ellen!
“Attentive?
I hate him!
“Yes, I am.
Poor thing!
Dear uncle!
Cathy rose.
“You marry?
I followed.
Heathcliff!
Forgive me!
How dare I?
How dare I?
and rather!
Not at all!
“Naturally!
?” I asked.
Thornfield!
By my word!
et mes bas?
What a cry!
What bride?
Mason does.
What was I?
He entered.
“What then?
Not at all.
“Who is it?
What is it?
What is it?
Was it dry?
Come to me.
my darling!
Scoundrel!
But, alas!
Take care.
Who is it?
“Oh, dear!
Catherine!
You witch!
I’ll stay.
I did not.
For shame!
“Good-bye.
And there!
I started.
Poor papa!
Weep away.
“Eh, dear!
Catherine!
Thank God!
“What for?
have pity!
“Ma boite!
Rochester?
Rochester!
very well!
“Oh, Jane!
I set out.
for shame!
Like whom?
“What now?
Out I ran.
What then?
I said so.
What then?
Is she up?
He smiled.
Hey, dog!
“Come in!
Oh, papa!
it won’t?
It ended.
Earnshaw?
Cheer up!
Poor lad!
“She did!
“To stay!
Be quiet!
Infernal!
Good God!
I obeyed.
Bless me!
The late!
“No, no!
Oh, boy!
Damn it!
Wake up!
Oh, God!
Monster!
“Loving!
Dear me!
Darling!
Get off!
do look!
“Afraid?
It came.
Fairfax?
“He has!
‘Sophie!
“Oh, no!
Sisters?
“Not I!
Oh, no!
“Judas!
By God!
“There!
My God!
“Sorry?
Decide!
Get up!
“There!
“Ellen!
“Na—ay!
Joseph!
Answer!
‘Devil!
I know.
“There!
By God!
“Lizzy!
Georgy!
“Ghost!
Oh, no!
Bessie!
Oh, no!
“Speak!
hasten!
Truant!
“Where?
By God!
Get up!
I went.
Rivers!
“O God!
And oh!
“What!
Speak!
“What!
There!
Think!
Ellen!
Go on.
Hallo!
never?
“Well!
There!
O God!
“What!
“Fall!
v. 16.
“What!
To me!
There!
“Wake!
“What!
Order!
“Alas!
I did.
“Pooh!
drink!
“Good!
“What?
“What!
“Jane!
“Jane!
Where?
“Amen!
“Like!
Marry!
“I am.
“Jane!
I had.
“Mrs.
Stop!
“Mrs.
What!
What!
Dear!
“Mrs.
“Ech!
“Mrs.
Tush!
I do!
Mind!
‘Mrs.
“Noa!
“God!
Here!
Alas!
Come!
“Mrs.
Hush!
What!
“Mrs.
“Boh!
dear!
Alas!
Matt.
“Mrs.
What!
What!
“Mrs.
“Mrs.
help!
“Mrs.
Reed?
“Mrs.
Come!
What!
What?
Alas!
Hush!
What!
Stay!
John!
Alas!
What!
Jane!
Jane.
Jane!
Jane!
“Mr.
“Mr.
Ech!
“Mr.
Oho!
“Mr.
“Mr.
“Mr.
“No!
“Mr.
“Ah!
“Ah!
mim!
mim!
“Mr.
‘Do!
‘Mr.
‘Mr.
“Mr.
“No!
“Mr.
“Mr.
“Oh!
“Oh!
“Mr.
“Ah!
“Oh!
“Ah!
“Mr.
Ech!
“Oh!
“Mr.
J.E.
Bah!
“Mr.
“Ah!
“Ah!
yes.
Mrs.
“Mr.
“Mr.
Why?
“Mr.
“Ah!
“St.
“Mr.
“No.
“St.
“St.
“St.
“St.
“No.
You?
“St.
“Ah!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
Oh!
No!
Oh!
Ah!
No!
Ah!
Ah!
Ah!
No!
Oh!
Oh!
No!
ha!
No!
Ah!
Go!
ha!
Oh!
Ah!
Oh!
Oh!
No!
Oh!
Oh!
